
CHAPTER II. A CONTINUOUS CARNIVAL
We began to wish that
the Peninsula would cultivate repose of manner. Our tempers were
sorely shaken, and when, in the pale chill of dawn, we arrived at
Cordova, sleepless, nauseated, and out of love with humanity, we had
every prospect of passing a wretched forenoon.

Thus it is I am inclined to believe we lay down under an orange tree
and dreamed a dream of the "Arabian Nights." Or perhaps it was only
another freak of the Carnival. At all events, a cup of coffee, and the
world was changed. Cordova! A midsummer heat, a land of vineyards and
olive groves, palms and aloes, a white, unearthly city, with narrow,
silent, deathlike streets, peopled only by drowsy beggars and by
gliding maskers that seemed more real than this Oriental picture in
which they moved, high walls with grated, harem-like windows, and an
occasional glimpse, through some arched doorway, into a
marble-floored, rose-waving, fountain-playing patio, enchanted and
mysterious, a dream within a dream. Cordova is more than haunted. It
is itself a ghost. The court of the Spanish caliphs, at once the Mecca
and the Athens of the West, a holy city which counted its baths and
mosques by hundreds, a seat of learning whose universities were
renowned for mathematics and philosophy, chemistry, astronomy, and
medicine, and within whose libraries were treasured manuscripts by
hundreds of thousands, a star of art and poetry, it ever reproaches,
by this lovely, empty shadow, the Christian barbarism that spurned
away the Moors.

The insulted Mosque of Cordova well-nigh makes Mohammedans of us all.
Entering by the studded Door of Pardon into the spacious Court of
Oranges, with its ancient trees and sparkling quintette of fountains,
one passes onward under the Arch of Blessings into a marble forest of
slender, sculptured pillars. The wide world, from Carthage to
Damascus, from Jerusalem to Ephesus and Rome, was searched for the
choicest shafts of jasper, breccia, alabaster, porphyry, until one
thousand four hundred precious columns bore the glory of rose-red
arches and wonder-roof of gilded and enamelled cedar. More than seven
thousand hanging lamps of bronze, filled with perfumed oil, flashed
out the mosaic tints,--golds, greens, violets, vermilions,--of
ceiling, walls, and pavement. All this shining sanctity culminated in
the Mihrab, or Prayer-Niche, an octagonal recess whose shell-shaped
ceiling is hollowed from a single block of pure white marble. This
Holy of Holies held the Koran, bound in gold and pearls, around
which the Faithful were wont to make seven turns upon their knees, an
act of devotion that has left indisputable grooves in the marble of
the pavement.

The Christian conquerors splashed whitewash over the exquisite
ceiling, hewed down the pillars of the outer aisles to give space for
a fringe of garish chapels, and even chopped away threescore
glistening columns in the centre to make room for an incongruous
Renaissance choir, with an altar of silver gilt and a big pink
retablo. We could have wandered for endless hours among the strange
half-lights and colored shadows of that petrified faith of Islam,
marvelling on the processes of time. It is claimed that the Arab
mosque rose on the site of a Roman temple, whence Mahomet drove forth
Janus, to be in his own turn expelled by Christ. The race of those who
bowed themselves in this gleaming labyrinth has fared ill at Spanish
hands. Even now a Moor, however courteous and cultured, is refused
admission to certain Castilian churches, as the Escorial.

How did we ever part from Cordova, from her resplendent, desecrated
mosque, her stone lanes of streets, her hinted patios, the Moorish
mills and Roman bridge of her yellow Guadalquivir? It must all have
been a morning dream, for the early afternoon saw us tucked away in
another second-class carriage speeding toward Granada.

We were in beautiful Andalusia, _la tierra de Maria Santisima_. The
green slopes of the Sierra Morena, planted to the top with olive
groves, watched the beginnings of our journey, and banks of strange,
sweet flowers, with glimpses of Moorish minarets and groups of
dark-faced, bright-sashed peasants, looking as if they had just
stepped down from an artist's easel, beguiled us of all physical
discomforts save heat and thirst. When the sun was at its sorest, the
train drew up at a tumble-down station, and we looked eagerly for the
customary water seller, with his cry of "Water! Fresh water! Water
cooler than snow!" But it was too warm for this worthy to venture out,
and our hopes fastened on a picturesque old merchant seated in a shaft
of cypress shade beside a heap of golden oranges. Those juicy globes
were a sight to madden all the parched mouths in the train, and
imploring voices hailed the proprietor from window after window. But
our venerable hidalgo smoked his cigarette in tranquil ease,
disdaining the vulgarities of barter. At the very last moment we
persuaded a ragged boy in the throng of bystanders to fetch us a
hatful of the fruit. Then the peasant languidly arose, followed the
lad to our window, named an infinitesimal price, and received his coin
with the bow of a grandee. He was no hustler in business, this
Andalusian patriarch, but his dignity was epic and his oranges were
nectar.

We shall never know whether or not we had an adventure that evening. A
wild-eyed tatterdemalion swung himself suddenly into our compartment
and demanded our tickets, but as all the Andalusians looked to our
unaccustomed view like brigands, we did not discriminate against this
abrupt individual, but yielded up our strips of pasteboard without
demur. A swarthy young Moor of Tangier, the only other occupant of the
carriage, sharply refused to surrender his own until the intruder
should produce a conductor's badge, whereupon the stranger swore in
gypsy, or "words to that effect," wrenched open the door and fled,
like Judas, into the outer dark. The Moor excitedly declared to us
that our tickets would be called for at the station in Granada, that
we should have to pay their price to the gate-keeper, and that our
irregular collector, hiding somewhere along the train, would be
admitted by that corrupt official to a share in the spoils. Moved by
our dismay, this son of the desert thrust his head through the window
at the next stop, and roared so lustily for the conductor and the
civil guard that, in a twinkling, the robber, if he was a robber,
popped up in the doorway again, like a Jack-in-the-box, and rudely
flung us back the tickets. Thereupon our benefactor, if he was a
benefactor, solemnly charged us never, on the Granada road, to give up
anything to anybody who wore no gilt on his cap.

More and more the purple mountains were folding us about, until at
last we arrived at Granada, too tired for a thrill. Mr. Gulick's
constant care, which had secured us harborage in Madrid, had provided
welcome here. Content in mere well-being, it was not until the
following afternoon that tourist enterprise revived within us. Then we
somewhat recklessly wandered down from the Alhambra hill into the
heart of the People's Carnival, a second Sunday of festival given over
to the enjoyment of the lower classes. The grotesque costumes were
coarser than ever and the fun was rougher. The maskers cracked whips
at the other promenaders, blew horns, shook rattles, and struck about
them with painted bladders, but the balconies were bright with the
bewitching looks of Andalusian beauties, each vying with the rest in
throwing the many-colored _serpentinas_, curly lengths of paper that
crisp themselves in gaudy fetters about their captives. A single
business house in Granada claimed to have sold over a million of
these, representing a value of some ten thousand dollars, during
Carnival week. Southern Spain was grumbling bitterly against the
Government and the war taxes, and in Seville, where a tax is put on
masks, the Carnival had been given up this year as last; but Granada
would not be cheated of her frolic. Our study of this closing phase of
the Carnival was cut short by the recollection that it was, above all,
the _fiesta_ of pickpockets. Finding ourselves, on the superb _Paseo
del Salon_, in the midst of a hooting, jostling, half-gypsy mob,
rained upon with _confetti_, called upon in broken French and English,
pressed upon by boys and beggars, and happening to catch sight of the
stately bronze statue of Columbus which the women of Granada had
recently stoned because, by discovering America, he brought all the
Cuban troubles upon Spain, we took the hint of the wise navigator's
eye and decided that we two stray Yankees might be as well off
somewhere else. "Feet, why do I love you?" say the Spaniards; and so
said we, suiting the action to the word.

CHAPTER III. WITHIN THE ALHAMBRA

     "The Sierra Nevada, an enormous dove which shelters under its
     most spotless wings Saracen Granada."--ALARCON: _Los Seis
     Velos_.

Our surprises were by no means over. We had come to Granada to bask in
the quintessence of earthly sunshine, and we found bleak rains, dark
skies, and influenza. The Moorish palace was indeed as wonderful as
our lifelong dream of it,--arched and columned halls of exquisite
fretwork, walls of arabesque where flushes and glints of color linger
yet, ceilings crusted with stalactite figures of tapering caprice, but
all too chill, even if the guides would cease from troubling, for
tarrying revery. We tarried, nevertheless, were enraptured, and caught
cold. We were dwelling in the village on the Alhambra hill, within the
circuit of the ruined fortress, in a villa kept by descendants of the
Moors, but the insolent grippe microbe respected neither ancient blood
nor republican. During the month of our residence, every member of the
household was brought low in turn, and there were days when even the
stubborn Yankees retreated to their pillows, lulled by the howling of
as wild March winds as ever whirled the grasshopper vane on Faneuil
Hall. From beyond the partition sounded the groans of our
fever-smitten hostess, and from the kitchen below arose the noise of
battle between our sturdy host and the rebel spoons and sauce-pans. If
we could not always swallow his bold experiments in gruel and
porridge, we could always enjoy the roars of laughter with which that
merry silversmith plied his unaccustomed labors. It is said that there
are only three months of the year when Granada is fit to live in, and
certainly February and March are not of these. But our delighted
spirits had no thought of surrender to our discomfited bodies. We
would not go away. It is better to ache in beautiful Granada than to
be at ease elsewhere.

At the first peep of convalescence, we fled out of doors in search of
a sunbeam and discovered, again to our surprise, this immemorial
Alhambra hill as young as springtime. The famous fragments of towers,
with their dim legends of enchantment, all those tumbled masses of
time-worn, saffron-lichened masonry, are tragically old, yet the
tender petals of peach blossoms, drifting through the fragrant air,
lay pink as baby touches against those hoary piles. We rested beside
many an ancient ruin overclambered by red rosebuds or by branches
laden with the fresh gold of oranges, where thrushes practised songs
of welcome for the nightingales. We were too early for these sweetest
minstrels of the Alhambra, who, like the Moors of long ago, were
yearning on the edge of Africa for the Vega of Granada.

One expects, shut in by the crumbling walls of the Alhambra, in shadow
of the ruddy towers, in sound of the Moslem fountains, to live with
dreams and visions for one's company, to have no associates less
dignified than the moonlight cavalcades of shadowy Arabian warriors,
whom the mountain caverns cast forth at stated seasons to troop once
more in their remembered ways, or lustrous-eyed, lute-playing
sultanas, or, at least, a crook-backed, snow-bearded magician, with a
wallet full of talismans, and footsteps that clink like the gold of
buried treasure. But here again the eternal fact of youth in the world
disconcerts all venerable calculations. The Alhambra dances and laughs
with children--ragamuffins, most of them, but none the less radiant
with the precious joy of the morning.

They are gentle little people, too. It became well known on the hill
that we were Americans, yet not a pebble or rude word followed us from
the groups of unkempt boys among whom we daily passed. Once a mimic
regiment, with a deafening variety of unmusical instruments and a
genuine Spanish flag, charged on me roguishly and drew up in battle
square about their prisoner, but it was only to troll the staple song
of Spanish adolescence: "I want to be a soldier," and when I had
munificently rewarded the captain with a copper, the youngsters doffed
their varied headgear, dipped their banner in martial salute, and
contentedly re-formed their ranks. It was seldom that we gave money,
but we usually carried _dulces_ for the little ones, who, even the
dirtiest, have their own pretty standard of manners.

Some half-dozen _pequenitos_, not one of whom was clearly out of
petticoats, were scampering off one day, for instance, their thanks
duly spoken, and their bits of candy just between hand and mouth, when
they turned with one accord, as if suddenly aware of an abruptness in
their leave-taking, and trotted back to bow them low, their tatters of
cap sweeping the ground, and lisp with all Spanish gravity, "Good
afternoon, senora." One chubby hidalgo tipped over with the
profundity of his obeisance, but the others righted him so solemnly
that the dignity of the ceremonial was unimpaired.

The habit of begging, that plague of tourist resorts, is an incessant
nuisance on the Alhambra hill. Half-grown girls and young women were
the most shameless and persistent of our tormentors. Age can be
discouraged, and babyhood diverted, while the Spanish boy, if his
importunities are met by smile and jest, will break into a laugh in
the midst of his most pathetic appeals and let you off till next time.

"A little money for our Blessed Lady's sake, senora. I am starving."

"Wouldn't you rather have a cigarette?"

"And that I would."

"Then you are not starving, little brother. Run away. I have no
cigarettes."

"But you have money for me, senora."

"No, nor enough for myself, not enough to buy one tile of the
Alhambra."

"Then may God take care of you!"

"And of you!"

 
But the wild-haired, jet-eyed gypsy girl from the Albaicin is
impervious to mirth and untouched by courtesy. She would not do us the
honor of believing our word, even when we were telling the truth.

"Five _centimos_ to buy me a scarlet ribbon! Five _centimos_!"

"Not to-day, excuse me. I have no change."

"Hoh! You have change enough. Look in your little brown bag and see."

"I have no change."

"Then give me a _peseta_. Come, now, a whole _peseta_!"

"But why should I give you a _peseta_?"

The girl stares like an angry hawk.

"But why shouldn't you?" Darting away, she hustles together a group of
toddlers, hardly able to lisp, and drives them on to the attack.

"Beg, Isabelita! Beg of the lady, little Conception! Beg, Alfonsito!
Beg, beg, beg! Beg five _centimos_, ten _centimos_! Beg a _peseta_ for
us all!"

And out pop the tiny palms, and the babble of baby voices makes a
pleading music in the air. It is for such as these that the little
brown bag has learned to carry _dulces_.

Before the month was over we had, in a slow, grippe-chastened fashion,
"done our Baedeker." We had our favorite courts and corridors in the
magical maze of the Moorish palace; we knew the gardens and fountains
of the _Generalife_, even to that many-centuried cypress beneath whose
shade the Sultana Zoraya was wont to meet her Abencerrage lover; our
fortunes had been told in the gypsy caves of the Albaicin; we had
visited the stately Renaissance cathedral where, in a dim vault, the
"Catholic Kings," Ferdinand and Isabella, take their royal rest; we
had made a first acquaintance with the paintings of the fire-tempered
Granadine, Alonso Cano, and paid our dubious respects to the convent
of Cartuja, with its over-gorgeous ornament and its horrible pictures
of Spanish martyrdoms inflicted by that "devil's bride," Elizabeth of
England. We had explored the parks and streets of the strange old
city, where we possessed, according to the terms of Spanish
hospitality, several houses; but better than the clamorous town we
liked our own wall-girdled height, with its songful wood of English
elms, planted by the Duke of Wellington, its ever murmuring runlets
of clear water, its jessamines and myrtles, its Arabian Nights of
mosque and tower, and its far outlook over what is perhaps the most
entrancing prospect any hill of earth can show. The sunset often found
us leaning over the ivied wall beneath the _Torre de la Vela_, that
bell-tower where the first cross was raised after the Christian
conquest, gazing forth from our trellised garden-nook on a vast
panorama of gray city all quaintly set with arch and cupola, of
sweeping plain with wealth of olive groves, vineyards, orange
orchards, pomegranates, aloes, and cypresses, bounded by glistening
ranks of snow-cloaked mountains. From the other side of the Alhambra
plateau, the fall is sheer to the silver line of the Darro. Across the
river rises the slope of the Albaicin, once the chosen residence of
Moorish aristocracy, but now dotted over, amid the thickets of cactus
and prickly pear, with whitewashed entrances to gypsy caves. Beyond
all shine the resplendent summits of the great Sierras.

Yet it is strange how homely are many of the memories that spring to
life in me at the name of the Alhambra,--decorous donkeys, laden with
water-jars, trooping up the narrow footpath to the old Fountain of
Tears, herds of goats clinging like flies to the upright precipice, a
lurking peasant darting out on his wife as she passes with a day's
earnings hidden in her stocking and holding her close, with laughter
and coaxing, while he persistently searches her clothing until he
finds and appropriates that copper hoard, and our own cheery little
house-drudge washing our linen in a wayside rivulet and singing like a
bird as she rubs and pounds an unfortunate handkerchief between two
haphazard stones:--

     "I like to live in Granada,
       It pleases me so well
     When I am falling asleep at night
       To hear the _Vela_ bell."

There is the proud young mother, too, whom we came upon by chance over
behind the Tower of the Princesses, where her pot of _puchero_ was
bubbling above a miniature bonfire, while the velvet-eyed baby boy
sucked his thumb in joyous expectation. She often made us welcome,
after that, to her home,--a dingy stone kitchen and bedroom,
unfurnished save for pallet, a few cooking-utensils, a chest or two,
and, fastened to the wall, a gaudy print of _La Virgen de las
Angustias_, the venerated _Patrona_ of Granada. But this wretched
abode, the remains of what may once have been a palace, opened on a
lordly pleasure-garden with walls inlaid with patterns of rainbow
tiles, whose broken edges were hidden by rose bushes. There were
pedestals and even fragments of images in this wild Eden, jets of
sparkling water and walks of variegated marble. In the course of the
month, English and Spanish callers climbed the hill to us and
encompassed us with kindness, but we still maintained our incorrigible
taste for low society and used to hold informal receptions on sunny
benches for all the tatterdemalions within sight. Swarthy boys,
wearied with much loafing, would thriftily lay aside their cigarettes
to favor us with conversation, asking many questions about America,
for whose recent action they gallantly declined to hold us
responsible. "It was not the ladies that made the war," said these
modern cavaliers of the Alhambra.

Their especial spokesman was a shambling orphan lad of some fifteen
summers, with shrewd and merry eyes. Nothing pleased him better than
to give an ornamental hitch to the shabby, bright-colored scarf about
his thin, brown throat, and proceed to expound the political
situation.

"You admire the Alhambra? I suppose you have no palaces in America
because your Government is a republic. That is a very good thing. Our
Government is the worst possible. All the loss falls on the poor. All
the gain goes to the rich. But there are few rich in Spain. America is
the richest country of all the world. When America fought us it was as
a rich man, fed and clothed, fighting a poor man weak from famine. And
the rich man took from the poor man all that he had. Spain has nothing
left--nothing."

"Oh, don't say that! Spain has the Alhambra, and beautiful churches,
beautiful pictures."

"Can one eat churches and pictures, my lady?"

"And a fertile soil. What country outblooms Andalusia?"

His half-shod foot kicked the battle-trampled earth of the immortal
hill contemptuously.

"Soil! Yes. All the world has soil. It serves to be buried in."

This budding politician graced us with his company one Sunday
afternoon, when we went down into Granada to see a religious
procession. Our Lady of Lourdes, escorted by a distinguished train of
ecclesiastical and civic dignitaries, with pomp of many shining lights
and sonorous instruments, with peal of church bells and incongruous
popping of fireworks, passed through extended ranks of candle-bearing
worshippers, along thronged streets, where every balcony was hung with
the national red and yellow, to the Church of Mary Magdalene. There
the sacred guest was entertained with a concert, and thence conducted,
with the same processional state, amid the same reverent salutations
of the multitude, back to her own niche. Our youthful guide showed
himself so devout on this occasion, kneeling whenever the image, borne
aloft in a glory of flowers and tapers, passed us, and gazing on every
feature of the pageant with large-eyed adoration, that we asked him,
as we climbed the hill again, if he would like to be a priest. But he
shrugged his shoulders. "There are better Christians in Spain than the
priests," he answered.

The son of the house, Don Pepe, a young man of five and twenty, who
usually attended us on any difficult excursion, was also frankly
outspoken in his disapproval of the clergy. He could hardly hold his
countenance in passing a Franciscan friar. "There walks the ruin of
Spain," he muttered once, with bitter accent, turning to scowl after
the bareheaded, brown-frocked figure so common in Granada streets. We
had, indeed, our own little grudge against the friars, for they were
the only men of the city who forced us off the narrow sidewalks out
into the rough and dirty road. All other Granadines, from dandies to
gypsies, yielded us the strip of pavement with ready courtesy, but the
friars, three or four in Indian file, would press on their way like
graven images and drive us to take refuge among the donkeys.

This escort of ours, formally a Catholic, was no more a lover of State
than of Church. He was eager to get to work in the world and, finding
no foothold, charged up his grievance against the Government. He was
firmly persuaded that Madrid had sold the Santiago and Manila
victories to Washington for sums of money down,--deep down in
official pockets. But his talk, however angry, would always end in
throwing out the hands with a gesture of despair.

"But what use in revolutions? Spain is tired--tired of tumult, tired
of bloodshed, tired of deceit and disappointment. A new government
would only mean the old dogs with new collars. We, the people, are
always the bone to be gnawed bare. What use in anything? Let it go as
God wills."

The Silvela and Polavieja ministry came in during our stay at Granada,
and the Liberal and Republican chorus against what was known as the
Reactionary Government swelled loud. "It means the yoke of the
Jesuits," growled our burly host. Our Alhambra dream suffered frequent
jars from these ignoble confusions of to-day. When we were musing
comfortably on the melancholy fortunes of Boabdil, a cheap newspaper
would be thrust before our eyes with an editorial headed "Boabdil
Sagasta." It is always best to do what one must. Since we could not be
left in peace to the imagination of plumy cavaliers, stars of Moslem
and Christian chivalry, who sowed this mount so thick with glorious
memories, we turned our thoughts to the poor soldiers from Cuba,
especially during the week throughout which they paraded the cities of
Spain in rag-tag companies under rude flags with the ruder motto:
"_Hungry Repatriados_." Their appearance was so woful that it became a
by-word. A child, picking up from a gutter one day a mud-stained,
dog-eared notebook, cried gleefully, "It's a _repatriado_." There was
no glamour here, but the courage and sacrifice, the love and anguish,
held good.

Granada had borne her share in Spain's last war sorrow. So many of her
sons were drafted for the Antilles that her anger against America
waxed hot. A few months before our arrival every star-spangled banner
that could be hunted out in shop or residence was trampled and burned
in the public squares. The Washington Irving Hotel hastened to take
down its sign, and even the driver of its omnibus was sternly warned
by the people to erase those offensive American names from his vehicle
on pain of seeing it transformed into a chariot of fire. A shot,
possibly accidental, whistled through the office of the English
consul, who was given to understand, in more ways than one, that Spain
made little difference between "the cloaked enemy" and the foe in the
field. Meanwhile, month after month, the recruits were marched to the
station, and the City Fathers, who came in all municipal dignity to
bid the lads godspeed, were so overwhelmed by the weeping of the women
that they forgot the cream of their speeches.

Among the new tales of Spanish valor told us on the Alhambra hill was
this:--

When lots were drawn for military service, one blithe young scapegrace
found in his hand a fortunate high number, but, walking away in fine
feather over his luck, he met the mother of a friend of his, sobbing
wildly as she went. Her son had been drafted, and the two hundred
dollars of redemption money was as far beyond her reach as those
dazzling crests of the Sierra Nevada are above the lame beggar at the
Alhambra gate. Then the kindly fellow, troubled by her grief and
mindful of the fact that, orphan as he was, his own parting would be
at no such cost of tears, offered to serve in her boy's stead. Her
passion of gratitude could not let his service go all unrecompensed.
Poorest of the poor, she went about among her humble friends, lauding
his deed, until she had collected, _peseta_ by _peseta_, the sum of
sixteen dollars, which she thrust into his hands to buy comforts for
the campaign. But another sobbing mother sought him out. He had saved
her neighbor's son; would he not save hers? Laughing at her logic and
moved by her faith in him, he answered: "I am only one man, senora. I
cannot go in place of two. But here are sixteen dollars. If you can
find a substitute at such a price, the money is yours."

Sixteen dollars is a fortune to hunger and nakedness, and the
substitute was found. As the year wore on those two mothers did not
let the city forget its light-hearted hero, and a great assembly
gathered at the station to honor his return. A remnant of his comrades
descended from the train, but as for him, they said, he had died in
Cuba of the fever months before.

His was no poetic death like that of the Abencerrages. Happy
Abencerrages! They knew the Alhambra in the freshness of her beauty.
Their last uplifted glances looked upon the most exquisite ceilings in
the world. Their blood left immortal stains on the marble base of the
fountain. But this young Spaniard, in his obscure Cuban grave, only
one out of the eighty thousand, will promptly be forgotten. _No
importa._ There must be something better than glory for the man who
does more than his duty.



Chapter IV. A FUNCTION IN GRANADA

     "O Love Divine, Celestial Purity,
       Pity my cries!
     My soul is prone before a clouded throne.
       Let thy keen light arise,
     Pierce this obscurity
       And free my dream-bound eyes!"
                                   --_Ganivet's Last Poem._


The civilization of Spain, streaked as it is with Oriental barbarisms,
belated and discouraged as the end of the nineteenth century finds it,
is still in many respects finer than our own. In everything that
relates to grace and charm of social intercourse, to the dignified
expression of reverence, compassion, and acknowledgment, Spain puts us
to the blush. I was especially touched in Granada by the whole-souled
sympathy and veneration with which the city rendered public honors to
one of its sons, Angel Ganivet, who died in the preceding winter, a
poet hardly thirty.

Although I had glanced over obituary notices of this Spanish writer in
the Paris papers, I had but a vague idea of his work and life, and
sought, before the night of the memorial ceremonies, for further
information. I appealed, first of all, to our table waiter, whose
keen black eyes instantly turned sad and tender.

"_Pobre! Pobre!_ He threw himself into the river at Riga, in Russia,
where he was consul. It was at the close of the war. And he such a
genius! So young! So true a Spaniard! But all Granada will be at the
theatre. He left his play to Granada, asking that it be seen here
first of all. I have never read his books, but I have met him in the
streets, and lifted my hat to him for a wise _caballero_ who cared
greatly for Spain."

My next appeal was to our kind neighbor, the English consul, who
assured me laughingly that he, like myself, was vainly ransacking the
few bookstores of Granada for Ganivet's works.

"The first time I ever heard the name," he added, "was some three or
four years ago, when I noticed an old gentleman standing often in
front of my house, and gazing at the British coat-of-arms above my
door. He told me one day when I drew him into talk that he had a
nephew, Angel Ganivet, roaming in foreign lands. 'But he does not
forget his old uncle,' said he. 'I always receive my little pension
prompt to the day, and so I like to look at the foreign shields about
the city, and remember my nephew, far away, who remembers me.' That
was a trifle, of course, but it gave me a kindly feeling for the young
fellow, and I'm sorry he came to such an end. They found him in the
river, you know. I dare say it was suicide, and likely enough the
defeat of Spain had its share in causing his despondency; but nobody
knows. He was a zealous patriot, I understand, and all Granada seems
to take his death to heart."

My next authority was an aged Granadine, a man of letters; but he had
not read Ganivet's books.

"I have heard of him often," he said, "but I never met him. He was not
much in Granada, although he seems to have had a romantic affection
for the place. _Bueno!_ Its pomegranates are worth remembering. But
Ganivet liked to live in foreign countries, with the idea of
understanding his own better by comparison. He was young; he still had
hopes for Spain. Eighty years are on my head, and I have long done
with hoping. I have served in my country's armies, I have served in
her Government, I have seen much of Church and State, and since the
night when they murdered General Prim I have seen nothing good. But
Ganivet had faith in the national future, and the people, without
waiting to ask on what that faith was founded, love him for it, and
mourn his loss as if he had been their benefactor. They are all going
to pour into the theatre to-morrow night to hear his symbolic drama,
that not one in a hundred of them will try to understand, and the
hundredth will get it all wrong."

The "function" took place in the _Gran Teatro de Isabel la Catolica_,
a name to conjure with throughout all Spain, and especially in
Granada. The day set for the performance, and widely advertised by
newspapers and posters for a month in advance, was a Wednesday. On
Tuesday, in a fever lest we be too late, we arrived at the ticket
office. We had our hurry all to ourselves. Apparently nobody else had
as yet taken a seat. The office was empty, save for us and our
attendant train of boys and beggars.

The official in charge, deaf, slow, and courteous, invited us into a
private room and gave us rocking-chairs by the _brasero_, while he,
with paper and pencil, laboriously added the price of our _entradas_
to the price of our modest box, and spent five minutes in subtracting
the amount from the figure of the small bill we handed him. The
counting out of the change was another strain on his arithmetic, and,
after all these toils, we were still without tickets. He said he would
"write them out at home," and we might send some one for them the next
day. But he affably offered to show us the theatre, and led us through
black passages to a great dusky space, where, while he struck match
after match, we could catch glimpses of pit and balconies, and even a
far-off stage, with a group of actors gathered about a lamp,
rehearsing the play. In Wednesday morning's paper, however, they
announced with entire nonchalance that they were not ready yet, and
would postpone the representation until Thursday.

On Thursday evening the theatre, choking full though it was, hardly
presented a brilliant appearance. Granada is not Madrid, nor Seville,
and the best the Granadines had to offer their dead poet was the
tribute of their presence in such guise as they could command. The
big, barnlike theatre, with its rows of broken lamp-chimneys, looked
shabby, and the rag-tag proportion of the audience was so great that
it overflowed the _Paraiso_ into the aisles and doorways and all
conceivable corners. People were so jumbled and crumpled together
that, with reminiscences of my traveller's hold-all, I found myself
wondering if they would ever shake out smooth again.

Whole families were there, from the infant in arms that invariably
screamed when the actors were reciting any passage of peculiar
delicacy, to the dozing old grandfather, who kept dropping his
cigarette out of his mouth in a way that threatened to set us all on
fire. The gentlemen, even in the boxes and the stalls, were generally
ungloved, and we did not see a dress suit in the house. Cloaks and
neckties were ablaze with color as usual, but the masculine toilets
eluded our stricter observation; for when the curtain was up, our eyes
were all for the stage, and between acts your Spaniard sits with hat
on head, enveloped in a cloud of tobacco smoke.

But the Andalusian ladies made amends for everything. By some
prehistoric agreement, Spanish women have yielded the rainbow to the
men, reserving for their own attire the quiet elegance of black or the
festive beauty of pure white. The dress that evening, even in the
principal boxes, was conspicuously simple. But the clear brunette
complexions, the delicate contours, the rich black hair worn high and
crowned with natural flowers, the waving fans and flashing glances,
cast a glamour over the whole scene.

The memorial rites themselves made up in quantity whatever they might
lack in quality, continuing from eight o'clock till two. An orchestra,
organized from Granada musicians for this occasion, opened the
programme. The bust of Ganivet, wrought by a young Granada sculptor,
was reverently unveiled. The star actor, Fuentes of Granada, who had
undertaken with his troupe to present his fellow-townsman's drama
purely as a labor of love, read an interpretation written by one of
Granada's leading critics. The orchestra was in evidence again,
introducing the first act, entitled "Faith." After this the orchestra
played Breton's serenade, "In the Alhambra," and the curtain rose for
the second act on so natural a scene-painting of the famous fortress
that the audience went wild with enthusiasm, and the blushing artist,
also a Granadine, had to be literally shoved from the wings upon the
stage to receive his plaudits.

Between the second act, "Love," and the last act, "Death," came an
_andante elegiaco_, "written expressly for this artistic solemnity" by
a Granada composer. Here, again, the appreciation of the audience was
unbounded, and nothing would do but the reluctant master must leave
his box, struggle through the packed multitude to the conductor's
stand, and take the baton himself for a second rendering from the
first chord to the last. At the close of the third act the orchestra
did its part once more, and the celebration ended, somewhat
incongruously, with a lively bit of modern comedy.

There was imperfection enough, had one been disposed to look for it.
The fifty members of the impromptu orchestra had hardly brought
themselves into accord, the acting was not of the best Spanish
quality, and the players had not half learned their parts. Every long
declamation was a duet, the prompter's rapid undertone charging along
beneath the actor's voice like a horse beneath its rider. But the
audience understood, forgave, were grateful, and sat with sublime
patience through the long pauses between the acts, repeating one to
another, "They say Fuentes is studying his speeches." As the caustic
old scholar had predicted, most of them, apparently, did not try to
understand the allegory. They applauded the obviously poetic touches,
the palpably dramatic situations, and when, in the Alhambra act, a
gypsy air was sung, the galleries delightedly caught it up and
chorused it over again.

But in general that nondescript assembly looked on in passive gravity
while _El Escultor de su Alma_ was rendered, as their poet had
bidden, in their own theatre and for them. They may have gathered
hints and snatches of that mystical message from the dead, whose lofty
look, fixed in shining marble, dominated all the house.

The restless Spirit of Man, seeking the perfect Truth, tears himself
loose from the bride of his youth, Heavenly Faith, and wanders in
beggary through the world. Yet Truth for him can only be the child of
his union with Faith, and in parting from one he has parted from both.
In old age, almost maddened by his wanderings and woes, he meets his
Truth again, full-grown and beautiful, but is so fierce and wild in
his desire to possess her that only Death can reconcile them--Death
and that Heavenly Faith who could not abandon him, though he had
forsaken her.

Ganivet's mother, who, with his brothers, witnessed the play from
behind the scenes, is said to have rejoiced in it as a last solemn
assurance from her son of his secure repose in the Catholic faith of
his fathers. It may not have meant so much to that great audience,
many of whom could neither read nor write, but those tiers upon tiers
of dark Spanish faces were full of earnestness and of a proud content.
However it may have baffled their heads, this legacy of a play, in its
Alhambra setting, spoke clearly to their hearts. One ragamuffin said
to another, as an all-sufficient criticism, "He was thinking of
Granada when he wrote it."

A few days later, I found and eagerly read Angel Ganivet's most
significant booklet, _Idearium_, published in the autumn of 1896, in
which he sets forth his dream for the future of his beloved country.

Ganivet claims that the deepest moral element in Spanish character is
stoicism, "not the brutal and heroic stoicism of Cato, nor the serene
and majestic stoicism of Marcus Aurelius, nor the rigid and extreme
stoicism of Epictetus, but the natural and humane stoicism of Seneca."
He holds that Seneca, himself a Spaniard, found his philosophy in the
inherent genius of the country, and only gave voice to the indwelling
soul of Spain. The Spanish church, cherishing this element, became a
thing apart from the general Catholicism of Europe. The long warfare
and incidental intercourse with the Moors stamped Spanish Christianity
with its two other characteristic features of mysticism and
fanaticism. "Mysticism was like a sanctification of African
sensuality, and fanaticism was a turning against ourselves, when the
Reconquest ended, of the fury accumulated during eight centuries of
combat."

The author, _muy espanol_, is naturally _muy catolico_, yet he
protests against violence in the repression of other forms of
religion. "Liberty should bring with it no fear." He believes that
Spain is, above all, _sui generis_, independent and individual. The
representative Spaniard is a free lance, striving and conquering by
his own impulse and under his own direction, like the Cid of old or
Cortes in the field of arms, like Loyola in the church, like Cervantes
in letters. He lays stress on the achievements of Spanish art--the
master paintings of Velazquez and Murillo, the master dramas of Lope
de Vega and Calderon, as expressing, better than political history has
expressed, that intensification of Spanish life resulting from the
struggle against the Arabs "and making of our nation a Christian
Greece."



He finds it logical and right that Spain, after her successive
periods of Roman influence, Visigothic influence, Arab influence,
and her modern era of colonial expansion, should now abandon foreign
policies and concentrate all her vitality within her own borders. Not
by the sword, but by the spirit, would he have Spain henceforth hold
sway over mankind, and especially over the Spanish-descended peoples
of South America.

He winces under the monopoly of the term "American" by the citizens of
the United States--"a formidable nation," he admits, "very populous,
very rich, and apparently very well governed." He notes, in contrast,
the poverty and comparative anarchy of the South American republics,
but he urges still that the Spanish character, shaped through such
eventful centuries, is an entity, clear and firm, with qualities well
defined, whereas the Yankees are yet in the fusing pot. He would have
all the peoples of Hispanian descent recognize and realize in
themselves this Spanish individuality, effecting not a political
union, but a "confederation, intellectual and spiritual," whose first
aim should be the preservation of Spanish ideas and ideals, and the
second, the free gift of these to all the nations of the earth.

The ancient glory of Spain, he says, has vanished like a dream; let a
new and whiter glory dawn. Her career of material conquest is ended.
Those savage struggles have left her faint and spent. Let her now seek
to attain, through purification and discipline, such fresh fulness of
life as shall insure the triumph of her spiritual forces--her fervent
faith and her unworldly wisdom. "Our Ulysses is Don Quixote."




Chapter V. IN SIGHT OF THE GIRALDA

     "We were nearing Seville. I felt the eager throbbing of my
     heart. Seville had ever been for me the symbol of light, the
     city of love and joy."--VALDES: _La Hermana San Sulpicio_.


One of the wise sayings of Andalusia runs, "Do not squeeze the orange
till the juice is bitter." And so we said good-by to Granada before we
were ready to go, and persuaded ourselves, in defiance of maps and
time-tables, that our shortest route to Seville led by Ronda. The
weather did its very best to dampen our enthusiasm for this wildest of
crag aeries, equally famed for romantic beauty of outlook and
salubrity of air. Men live long in Ronda, unless, indeed, they hit
against a bullet while practising their hereditary trade of
_contrabandista_. They have a saying that octogenarians there are only
chickens, but one should not believe all that they say in Ronda. Did
we not clamber, slipping on wet stones, down a precipitous path to
peer, from under dripping umbrellas, at what our guide declared was an
old Roman bridge? "It doesn't look old and it doesn't look Roman," was
the artist's dubious comment, but our highly recommended conductor, a
Gib, as the English-Spanish natives of Gibraltar Rock are called,
assured us that it was built in the days of Julius Caesar, but had been
wonderfully well preserved. We eyed him thoughtfully, bearing in mind
that he had already pointed out the statue of a long-dead poet as a
living politician; but we meekly continued through the lashing rain to
follow his long footsteps over the breakneck ways of that natural
fortress where race after race has left its autograph. The Roman
columns of the church make the Arab cupolas look young, and put the
Gothic choir altogether out of countenance. A bright-shawled peasant
woman, who we fondly hoped might be a smuggler's wife, drew us
delicious water from a Roman well in a Moorish patio, where a mediaeval
king of gentle memory used to drink his wine from cups wrought of the
skulls of those enemies whom he had beheaded with his own sword. But
not all this, and more, could efface our doubts of that Roman bridge,
which, indeed, we found, on a belated perusal of our guide-books, had
been erected by a Malaga architect in the last century.

The street rabble of Ronda was the rudest and fiercest we encountered
anywhere in Spain. Several times our guide wheeled suddenly to
confront some gypsyish lad, creeping up behind us with stone all ready
to throw, and when, at a glint of sunset through the stormy clouds, we
tried to slip out unattended to the neighboring _alameda_, with its
far-sweeping prospect of folded mountain ranges and its vertical view
of gorge and rushing river, the children actually hounded us back to
the hotel. Their leader was a scrofulous boy, with one cheek eaten
away, who had been taught to press his face so closely upon strangers
that, in fear of his open sore, they would hastily give money to keep
him back. He was a merry scamp and got a world of sport out of his
sickening business, laughing at the top of his voice to see himself
"avoided like the sun."

Although the tempest had lulled by evening, Ronda, still inhospitable,
would not let us sleep. All up and down the window-grated street
sounded, from midnight to morning, a tinkling of guitars. It was,
forsooth, St. Joseph's Day, and every Don Jose, every Dona Josefa,
every little Pepe, every pretty Pepita, must be saluted by a serenade.
All Andalusians are musical, taking much pleasure, moreover, in one of
their own bits of philosophy, "The poorest player has his uses, for he
can at least drive the rats out of the house." Rats or no, we left
Ronda by the morning train.

Our carriage was crowded with several Spaniards and a "Jew-Gib," who,
without saying "_oxte ni moxte_," assumed full charge of us and our
belongings for the journey. This unceremonious but really helpful
escort put every one of his fellow-travellers through a sharp
catechism as to birthplace, business, destination, and the like. Our
turn came first of all. "You are English?" "We speak English." "Ha!"
He fell into our own vernacular. "Came about three thousand miles to
Spain?" "Across the channel." He chuckled with prompt appreciation of
the situation and mendaciously translated to the carriage at large,
"The ladies are distinguished Londoners, on their way to visit
relatives in Seville," whereat the Andalusians smiled sleepily upon us
and asked permission to smoke. We consented cheerfully, as our Spanish
sisters had taught us that we should. "I like it," one pallid senora
had said on an earlier trip. "It makes me sick, yes, but men ought to
be men."

We were journeying toward the very palace of the sun, with gray ranks
of olive trees standing guard on either hand. "And posted among them,
like white doves, could be seen now and again a few mills where the
bitter olive is wont to pour its juice." Orange plantations and hedges
of the bluish aloe, fig trees, palms, and all manner of strange,
tropical flowers gladdened our approach to Seville. And when, at last,
we saw from afar the world-praised Giralda, the Moorish bell-tower of
the cathedral, soaring pink into a purple sky, we felt as if we were
really arrived in fairyland.

Our friendly Gib put his tall figure between us and the howling press
of swarthy porters and cab-drivers, scolded, expostulated, threatened,
picked out his men, beat down their prices, called up a policeman to
witness the bargain and take the number of our cab, raised his hat,
and vanished into grateful memory.

Six weeks in Seville! And six weeks in a Seville home, where evening
after evening the gay youth of Andalusia laughed and sang, danced and
rattled the castanets, and cast about our wondering Western souls
strange witcheries from which we shall never more go free. It was all
as Oriental as a dream. The Sultana of the South lifted her gleaming
coronet of domes and pinnacles above such a kingdom of idle, delicious
mirth as has permanently unfitted us for considering it important to
do our duty. Our hereditary bits of Plymouth Rock were melted up in
that fervent heat. Right or wrong? "Where there is music, there can be
no harm." True or false?

     "In this world, my masters,
       There's neither truth nor lie,
     But all things take the color
       Of the glass before the eye."

Only six weeks, and yet we shall ever go homesick for Seville, for her
palm trees and orange gardens, her narrow streets like lanes of
shadow, her tiled and statued patios, with caged birds singing answer
to the ripple of the fountain, the musical midnight cry of her
_serenos_, "her black and burning eyes like beacons in the dark," her
sighing serenaders, "lyrical mosquitoes," outside the grated window or
beneath the balcony, her fragrances of rose and jessamine, her poetic
sense of values. A homeless Andalusian, dinnerless and in rags, strums
on his guitar, a necessity which he would not dream of selling for
such a mere luxury as bread, and is happy. There is always sun to
sleep in. There are always piquant faces and gliding forms to gaze
after. What more does a mortal want? Exquisite Seville! No wonder that
her exiled sons still sing, after years of "comfortable living" in
foreign cities:--

     "When I am missing, hunt me down
       In Andalusia's purple light,
     Where all the beauties are so brown,
       And all the wits so bright."

Yet the old Arabian enchantment casts a glamour which the Anglo-Saxon
vision dimly recognizes as such and faintly strives against. To the
clear survey all is not charm. Grace, mirth, and music, on the one
hand, are offset by ignorance, suffering, and vice on the other. Many
evil things were told us, and some ugly things we saw, but to look on
Andalusia is to love her, even while realizing that to live with her
would put that love to a very stringent test.

The lordly Guadalquivir, for instance, so fair to see from the
picture-making summit of the Giralda, as he lingers through his
blooming Paradise, forgetful of the ocean, is not altogether goodly.

     "Ay, ay, the black and stinging flies he breeds
     To plague the decent body of mankind!"

The Andalusian leisure was a perpetual delight to us. A typical
Seville shop reaches far along the street front, with many open doors,
and a counter running the full length. Here ladies sit in pairs and
groups, never singly, to cheapen fans and mantillas, while the smiling
salesmen, cigarette in hand, shrug and gesticulate and give back
banter for banter as gayly as if it were all a holiday frolic. Scraps
of the graceful bargaining would float to our ears.

"Is the quality good?"

"As good as God's blessing."

Among the tempting wares of Seville are Albacete knives, with gorgeous
handles of inlaid ebony, tortoise, or ivory. The peasant women of
Andalusia so resent the charge of carrying these knives in their
garters that the Seville gamin dodges offence by asking them in an
unnecessarily loud voice if they carry garters in their knives. The
irascible dames do not stand upon fine points of rhetoric, however,
and when the small boy has delivered his shot, he does well to take to
his heels. We once saw one of these sturdy women, while a line of
soldiers, bristling with steel, was holding a street, seize a gallant
son of Mars by the shoulder and swing him, amid the laughter of his
comrades, out of her path as if he were a cabbage. Nobody knew how to
stop her, and she trudged serenely on, her broad back to those
helpless bayonets, down the forbidden way.

The beggars of Seville are gentler than those of Ronda and Granada,
but hardly less numerous. Mendicant figures are thick as Guadalquivir
mosquitoes in my memory of Andalusia. Some of those pitiful children
will haunt me till I die. There was a forlorn urchin, with filmy,
frightful eyes, to be seen in all weathers crouching on one side of
the road leading up to the Alhambra, so dull and dreary a little
fellow that he hardly grasped the coppers when they were thrust into
his weakly groping hands, and hardly stayed his monotonous formula of
entreaty for his other monotonous formula of thanks. There was an
idiot child in Seville--a mere lump of deformity--that would rush out
upon the startled stranger with an inarticulate, fierce little yell,
clutching at charity with a tiny, twisted claw. He seemed the very
incarnation of childish woe and wrong. Almost every hand dived into
pocket for him, and he was probably worth far more to his proprietors
than his rival on the street, a crafty little girl, with the most
lustrous eyes that painter ever dreamed. They were not blue nor gray,
but a living light in which both those colors had been melted.

The economists, who say so firmly that "nothing should ever be given
to mendicant children," can hardly have had the experience of seeing
Murillo's own cherubs, their wings hidden under the dirt, fluttering
about the car windows at Andalusian stations. I have it still on my
conscience that I occasionally gave away my comrade's share of our
luncheon as well as my own. She was too young and too polite to
reproach me, but too hungry to be comforted by the assurance that I
reproached myself. Sometimes a foreign traveller, very sure of his
Spanish, would attempt remonstrance with these small nuisances. I
remember one kindly Teuton in particular. Commerce had claimed him for
its own, but the predestined German professor shone out of his mild
blue eyes. A ragamuffin had mounted the car steps to beg at the
window, and Mein Herr delivered him such a lecture that the youngster
clung to his perch, fascinated with astonishment at the novel
doctrine, until the train was in alarmingly swift motion.



"This is a very bad habit of thine. I told thee so a month ago."

"Me, sir?"

"Thee, boy. When I passed over this road last, thou wert begging at
the windows, to my shame if not to thine. Tut, tut! Go thy ways. Look
for work, work, work."

"Work, sir?"

"Work, boy. And when thou hast found it, love it, and do it with a
will. Learn to read and write. Wash thy face and change thy customs,
and when thou art richer than I, then will I give thee a _peseta_."

Mendicancy is bred of ignorance, and in the seventeen and a half
millions that make up the population of Spain, more than twelve
millions do not read nor write.

Seville sight-seeing is no brief matter. You must climb the Giralda,
walk in the parks, view the yellowed fragments of the ancient city
wall, visit the tobacco factory, shop in _Las Sierpes_, buy pottery in
Triana, see the gypsy dances in the cafes, attend the Thursday
rag-fair, do reverence to the Columbus manuscripts in the _Biblioteca
Columbina_, look up the haunts of Don Juan, Figaro, Pedro the Cruel,
and explore the curious "House of Pilate," which, tradition says, was
built by a pilgrim noble after the Jerusalem pattern. You must lose
your heart to the Alcazar, the Alhambra of Seville, a storied palace
embowered in fountain-freshened gardens of palm and magnolia, oranges
and cypresses, rose and myrtle, with shadowy arcades leading to marble
baths and arabesqued pavilions. You must follow Murillo from gallery
to gallery, from church to church, above all, from the _Hospital de la
Caridad_, where hang six of his greatest compositions, to the _Museo
Provincial_, where over a score of the Master's sacred works, lovely
Virgins, longing saints, deep-eyed Christ-Childs, rain their sweet
influence. And first, last, and always, there is the cathedral. We had
been stunned at Burgos, blind to all save the Moorish features of
Cordova, almost untouched by the cold splendors of Granada, but to
Seville, as later to Toledo, we surrendered utterly. Beauty, mystery,
sublimity--these are Seville cathedral. Five centuries have gone to
the rearing and enriching of those solemn aisles and awful choir. The
colossal structure, second in size only to St. Peter's, is a majesty
before which Luther himself might well have trembled. Within a Spanish
cathedral one begins to understand the mighty hold of Roman
Catholicism on Spain. "I love," says Alarcon, whose jest and earnest
are as closely twined as fibres of the same heart, "the clouds of
incense which rise to the cupola of the Catholic temple, amid the
harmonies of the holy organ. (For this I am not a Protestant.)" And
elsewhere, writing of his childhood, he speaks of receiving in the
cathedral of Guadix all his first impressions of artistic
beauty,--beauty of architecture, music, painting, processional
splendors, tissue of gold and silver, cunning embroideries and
jewel-work, his first sense, in short, of poetry. And all these
impressions were inextricably blent with his first yearnings of holy
aspiration, his first passion of mystical devotion. But not even
Seville cathedral could win over our full sympathy. Too heavy were the
faces of the priests who "sang the gori gori," too selfish that wigged
and jointed doll, "Our Lady of Kings," with her sixty gorgeous
mantles, a few of which would have clothed all the poor of Andalusia.
Who shall draw the line between faith and superstition?

But let not the tourist suppose he can escape his tyrant Baedeker even
at the top of the Giralda. There are excursions that must be taken to
points of interest outside the city. Most imperative of all is the
trip to the ruined Roman amphitheatre of Italica, guarded by the
mighty names of Scipio Africanus, Trajan, Hadrian, and Theodosius. Off
we start, a dozen strong, in a great, open carriage, all the
women-folk with fans and veils and with flowers in the hair. We rattle
past the cathedral, over the bridge to Triana and out into the
sweet-breathed country, passing many a picturesque group on the
road,--these two peasants, for example, with their yellow-handled
knives thrust into scarlet girdles, tossing dice under a fig tree. Our
meditations among the crumbling blocks of that savage play-house would
perhaps interest the reader less than our luncheon. Such Andalusian
dainties as we swallowed,--cold soups like melted salads, home-made
fig marmalade, cinnamon pastes of which the gypsies know the secret,
and sugared chestnuts overflowed by a marvellous syrup wherein could
be detected flavors of lemon peel, orange peel, and a medley of
spices! In that scene of ancient bloodshed, of the lion's wrath and
the martyr's anguish, we ate, drank, and were merry, but our banquet
tasted of ghosts.

Chapter VI. PASSION WEEK IN SEVILLE

     "All that was gracious was bestowed by the Virgin, and she was
     the giver of all that human creatures could ask for. God
     frowned, while she smiled; God chastised, but she forgave;
     this last notion was by no means a strange one. It is accepted
     with almost absolute faith among the laboring classes of the
     rural parts of Spain."--GALDOS: _Marianela_.


Holy week throngs Seville to overflowing. The devout no longer scourge
themselves in public, sprinkling the pavements with their blood, but
Spaniards flock from all Andalusia, from Madrid, and even from the
northern provinces to the sunny city on the storied Guadalquivir.
Hotel charges run from twelve dollars a day up to incredible figures;
a mere bed in a lodging house costs its three dollars, four dollars,
or five dollars a night, and fortunate are those who enjoy the
hospitality of a private home.

The ceremonies opened Sunday morning with the procession of palms. We
had been told by our cathedral guide the day before that this
procession would take place at seven or half-past seven at the latest,
and had asked the maid to call us at half-past six. As the chiming
bells should have warned us, her knock was an hour tardy, but when,
breakfastless and eager, we reached the cathedral a few minutes after
eight, there was as yet no sign of a procession. Mass was being said
in the Sagrario and in several chapels, and the morning light poured
in through the rich-colored windows upon groups of kneeling figures
before every shrine. The women wore black mantillas, for, although
this most graceful of headdresses is losing credit on the fashionable
promenades of Seville, and is almost never seen in open carriages,
Holy Week demands it of all the faithful.

We asked a white-robed young chorister when the procession would form.
He answered with encouraging precision, "In twenty minutes." We roamed
about for a half hour or more through those majestic spaces, beneath
those soaring arches, aspiration wrought in stone, until by chance in
that shifting multitude we came face to face with our guide of the day
before. We asked how soon the procession would form. He said, "In
twenty minutes," and we went home for coffee.

When we returned the procession was streaming out of the cathedral
into the street of the _Gran Capitan_. It was simple and all the more
attractive for that simplicity. The colors of standards and vestments
were mainly purple and gold, and the long, yellow fronds of palm,
blown by the fresh breeze from the river, gleamed brighter than the
sheen of candle or of mitre. Turning the corner, the procession, now
facing the beautiful Giralda, entered by the ample Door of Pardon,
still incrusted with its Arabic decorations, into the Court of
Oranges, whose ripe fruit gave new touches of gold to the picture.

Venders of palm were stationed in every sheltered corner, selling
their wares, more than twice the height of a man, at fifteen cents
the frond, while boys, darting about with armfuls of olive, were glad
to take a cent the branch, and not have the best of their leafy store
filched from them by sly old women, more intent, like the rest of us,
on getting a blessing than deserving it.

Through the multitude the glittering palms and purple robes swept on
back into the cathedral, where the silent and remote archbishop, an
image of gold in his splendid apparel, shed his benediction not only
over the proud palms, but over every spray of "little gray leaves,"
like those of Gethsemane. These blessed palms, sprinkled with holy
water and wafting strange fragrances of incense, would be carried home
and kept in myriad balconies all the year through, to protect the
house from "the all-dreaded thunder-stone."

That Sunday afternoon at five o'clock we were leaning out expectantly
from our host's best balcony. With the constant Spanish courtesy, he
had betaken himself, with the children of the household, to a less
commanding balcony below, and his eldest son had considerately
withdrawn, accompanied by his fiancee, to a mere speck of a balcony
above. This left a dozen of us, Spanish, English, and American, to
enjoy as good a view as the city afforded of the processional
tableaux.

The oblong _Plaza de la Constitucion_, the scene in days gone by of
many a tournament, _auto de fe_, and bull-fight, is bounded on one
side by the ornate Renaissance facade of the city hall, and on the
other, in part, by the plain front of the court-house, before which
criminals used to be done to death. Private dwellings, with their
tiers of balconies, one of which had fallen to our happy lot, cross
the wider end of the _plaza_, while the other opens into the brilliant
street of _Las Sierpes_, too narrow for carriages, but boasting the
gayest shop windows and merriest cafes of all the town.

The _plaza_, always animated, fairly rippled with excitement this Palm
Sunday afternoon. The grand stand, erected in front of the city hall,
was filled, although many of the camp-chairs and benches placed in
thick-set rows on the farther side of the line of march were not yet
rented. Thursday and Friday are the days that draw the multitudes. The
crowd was bright with uniforms, most conspicuous being the spruce
white-edged, three-cornered hats and dark-blue, red-faced coats of the
civil guard. Venders of peanuts, peanut candy, macaroons, caramels,
and all manner of _dulces_ swung their baskets from one sweet-toothed
Spaniard to another, while wisely the water-seller went in their wake,
with the artistic yellow jar over his shoulder. One young pedler was
doing a flourishing business in crabs, the customers receiving these
delicacies in outstretched pocket handkerchiefs.

Busy as our eyes were kept, we were able to lend ear to the
explanations of our Spanish friends, who told us that the church
dignitaries, after the procession of palms, took no official part in
the shows of Passion Week, although many of the clergy belonged, as
individuals, to the religious brotherhoods concerned. The church
reserves its street displays for Corpus Christi. These brotherhoods,
societies of ancient origin, and connected with some church or chapel,
own dramatic properties often of great intrinsic value and
considerable antiquity.

For days before Holy Week one may see the members busy in the churches
at the task of arranging groups of sacred figures, vested as richly as
possible in garments of silk and velvet, with ornaments of jewels and
gold, on platforms so heavy that twenty-five men, at the least, are
needed to carry each. These litters are escorted through the principal
streets and squares of the city by their respective societies, each
brotherhood having its distinctive dress. It is customary for every
_cofradia_ to present two pageants--the first in honor of Christ; the
second, and more important, in honor of Mary, to whom chivalrous Spain
has always rendered supreme homage; but sometimes the two tableaux are
combined into one.

After long watching and waiting we saw, far down _Las Sierpes_, the
coming of the first procession. A line of police marched in advance to
clear the road. Then appeared a loosely ordered company of fantastic
figures in blue capes and blue peaked caps, absurdly high and reaching
down to the shoulder, with holes cut for the eyes. From beneath the
capes flowed white frocks, and the gloves and sandals were white.
These "Nazarenes," who looked like a survival of the Carnival,
conducted in silence a litter upon which was erected an image of the
crucified Christ, with face uplifted as if in prayer.

The pageant halted before the doors of the city hall to greet the
Alcalde, who rose from his red velvet chair and bared his head. Men
uncovered, and people stood all along the route, but acclamations were
reserved for Our Lady of the Star. Her attendant troop was dressed
like the preceding, with a star embroidered in white on the shoulder
of the blue tunic. Her litter was ablaze with candles and laden with
flowers; her outsweeping train was upborne by four little pages, and a
brass band followed her with unceasing music.



Sunset colors were in the sky before the procession of the second
brotherhood arrived. At last, far down the _Sierpes_, the dusk was
dotted with the gleam of many tapers, and above these, most impressive
in the dim distance, glimmered a white figure high upon the cross. As
the pageant drew near, waves of incense rolled out upon the air. The
crash of trumpets and deep boom of drums announced that Our Lady of
the Angels was advancing upon the same platform with her Son, for
music in these Passion Week processions is always a sign of the
presence of the Virgin. The brothers of this retinue wore black, save
that their peaked caps were purple.

As twilight gathered, a company of strange dark shapes bore past in
solemn hush the Most Holy Christ of the Waters. The Saviour hung upon
the cross, an angel receiving in a golden cup the blood from his
wounded side. Then her great banner of white and blue heralded the
approach of Our Lady of the Utter Grief, who passed with her
accustomed pomp of lights and music, holding to her eyes a
handkerchief said to be of the most exquisite lace.

Night had fallen when, at eight o'clock, a maid left on vigil called
us all from the dinner table to see the beautiful procession of
white-robed figures conducting Our Father Jesus of the Silence. The
figure of Christ, resplendent in gold and purple, stood before Herod,
whose mail-clad soldiers guarded the prisoner. The Roman costumes were
so well copied, and all the postures and groupings so startlingly
natural, that _vivas_ went up all along the crowded square. As the
banner of the Virgin saluted the Alcalde, her attendants let fall
their long white trains, which swept out quite six yards behind,
reaching from one brother to the next and yielding a wonderfully fine
effect in the slow march. Our Lady of the Bitterness, toward whom
leaned the tender look of St. John, was robed in superb brocade, so
precious that her train, which stood stiffly out behind, was guarded
by a soldier with drawn sword.

This closed the ceremonies of Palm Sunday, and the throng, catching
one from another the blithe, sweet Andalusian melodies, went singing
softly through the darkness on their various ways.

After Palm Sunday a secular quiet fell upon Seville, not broken until
Wednesday. At five o'clock this March afternoon it was still so hot
that few people were rash enough to move about without the shelter of
parasols. Sevillian priests, sombre-robed as they were, sauntered
cheerily across the _plaza_ under sunshades of the gayest hues,
orange, green, azure, red, and usually all at once, but the shamefaced
Englishmen flapped up broad umbrellas of an uncompromising black.
There was a breezy flutter of fans on the grand stand, the
water-sellers had to fill their jars again and again, and the
multitude of smokers, puffing at their paper cigarettes to cool
themselves, really brought on a premature twilight.

It was nearly seven before a score of gendarmes, marching abreast,
cleared the way for the procession. Then appeared, in the usual guise,
some twenty feet apart, two files of those strange shapes, with high,
peaked caps, whose visors descended to the breast, slowly advancing,
with an interval of about six feet from man to man. Their caps and
frocks were black, but the long capes glowed a vivid red. They carried
the customary lighted tapers, so tall that, when rested on the ground,
they reach to the shoulder. Midway between the files walked a
cross-bearer, followed by a Nazarene, who uplifted the standard of
St. Andrew's Cross in red on a black ground. Bearers of other insignia
of the order preceded the great litter, on which, under a golden palm
tree, was represented by life-size effigies the arrest of Christ among
His Disciples, St. Andrew having the foremost place. The second
pageant presented by this brotherhood was accompanied by bevies of
white-robed boys swinging censers and chanting anthems. Then came, in
effulgence of light, the Most Holy Virgin, escorted, as if she were
the earthly Queen of Spain, by a detachment of the Civil Guard, whose
white trimmings and gold belts gleamed in the candle rays.

The remaining three _cofradias_ that had part in the Wednesday
ceremonies exhibited but one pageant each. A troop in black and gold
conducted a Calvary, with Mary Mother and Mary Magdalene both kneeling
at the foot of the cross, robed in the richest velvet. Figures in
white, with stripes of red, came after, with a yet more costly
Calvary. The well-carved crucifix rose from a gilded mound, and Our
Mother of Healing wore a gold crown of exceeding price. But the third
Calvary, all wrought in black and gold, the colors of the brotherhood,
which were repeated in standard and costume, won the plaudits of the
evening. Here Longinus, the Roman centurion, mounted on a spirited
horse, was in the act of piercing with his lance the Saviour's side.
Amid _vivas_ and _bravos_ this Passion picture passed, like its
predecessors, in clouds of incense and peals of solemn music.

On Thursday the wearing of black was almost universal. We rummaged our
shawl straps for some poor equivalent of the Spanish black silks and
black mantillas. The Civil Guard was more superb than ever in
full-dress uniform, with red vests and white trousers. No sound of
wheels was suffered within the city limits, and late arrivals had to
commit their luggage to a porter and follow him on foot.

At three o'clock, in the Sagrario of the cathedral, the archbishop
washed the feet of thirteen old paupers, who sat in two confronting
rows, looking neat as wax and happy as honey, each dressed in a
brand-new suit, with a long-fringed damask towel over his shoulder.
Their old blood had been warmed by the archbishop's own wine, for they
had just come from luncheon in the ecclesiastical palace, where they
had been served by the highest dignitaries of the church and the
proudest nobles of the city. The function of foot washing was not
taken too seriously. The fat canons smiled good-humoredly on their
archbishop, as his group of attendants lowered him to his knees and
lifted him again before every old man in turn, and the acolytes nudged
one another with boyish mirth over the rheumatic, embarrassed efforts
of the beneficiaries to put on their stockings.

A Franciscan friar mounted the pulpit, however, and turned the
congregation, thickly sprinkled with English visitors, serious enough
by a succinct and fiery sermon, saying, in a nutshell, that love is
the glory of the religious life, but is the fruit only of Catholicism,
for nowhere, though one searches the world over, can there be found a
work of mercy--hospital, asylum, endowed school, charity of any sort
or kind--due to Protestantism. And the old paupers, glancing down at
their new suits and feeling the glow of their banquet, were glad to
the tips of their purified toes that their lots had been cast in
Catholic Spain.

By six o'clock the squares and streets along the processional route
were thronged again, although our Spanish friends assured us that the
numbers were less than usual. The war feeling kept the Americans and,
to some extent, the English away, while many of the Spanish of the
provinces, who were accustomed to take their annual outing in Seville
during the _Semana Santa_, were held at home this year by poverty or
mourning.

The first two pageants of the afternoon, those of the bull-fighters
and the cigarette-makers, were awaited with especial eagerness. For
these Seville brotherhoods, more than thirty in all, still maintain
something of the mediaeval structure of the guilds. Just as in England
and France, from the eleventh to the fifteenth century, or
thereabouts, organized companies of craftsmen used to present in
Passion Week successive scenes from the life of Christ, these Spanish
_cofradias_ to-day maintain such general lines of division in
performing a similar function. Yet any Catholic Sevillian may, if he
chooses, secure admission to any of these societies, irrespective of
his occupation. The young _caballero_ who chanced to be our prime
source of information this Thursday afternoon was himself of a
prominent family, a protege of the archbishop, and a student of law,
yet he belonged to the brotherhood of Fruit Venders, although his
devotion seemed a little languid, and he had excused himself on this
occasion from the long march in the breathless Nazarene garb.

Not all the brothers feel bound to perform this penitential service
every Passion Week, and, indeed, not all the brotherhoods. Several of
the most elaborate pageants were missing from the ranks this year.
Such omissions are not as disastrous to the processional effect as
they would have been in England, for example, some six centuries ago.
Then the gilded and tapestried platforms, set on wheels, which the
processions conducted through the streets, were really stages, and at
the halting places the best actors of each guild played upon its
particular platform an appointed scene from the sacred drama. The
sequence of events was duly observed, and the spectator, standing in
market-place or at street corner, while one theatre after another
rolled by him, saw acted out with much finery of wardrobe and
ingenuity of machinery, with tragic dialogue and declamation, relieved
by comic interludes, all the Bible story, from the revolt of Lucifer
to the Day of Judgment. But modern Spain, abandoning the acting and
recitation and substituting puppets for living men, has let slip the
dramatic sequence, so that a few pageants less means only so much
abatement in the general splendor of the spectacle.

The bull-fighters of Andalusia are eminently religious and are said,
likewise, to be remarkable for their domestic virtues. All their manly
fury is launched against the bull, and they have only gentleness left
for wives and children. I have heard no better argument for the bull
ring. At all events, these _toreros_, marching soberly in black, with
yellow belts, escorted with well-ordered solemnity an image of the
crucified Christ, followed by a queenly effigy of Our Lady of Refuge,
erect behind terraced ranks of candles on a flower-strewn litter,
under a costly canopy of black velvet embroidered with gold. The
cigarette-makers came after with their two pageants, Christ fastened
to the pillar, and Our Lady of Victory.

It was, as usual, the second upon which the main expense had been
lavished. A great company of acolytes, richly clad and swinging
censers of pure silver, went in advance of the Virgin, and three bands
of music followed her with continuous acclaim, while a regiment of
soldiers attended as a guard of honor. Immediately in front of the
_paso_ went, surrounded by officers and aides, General Ochando, his
head uncovered and his breast glittering with decorations, for the
young king of Spain is a member of this _cofradia_, and had sent the
distinguished military governor of the Provinces, who has a palace in
Seville, to represent him. Especial enthusiasm was called out by this
image of Mary, for the cigarette-makers had just presented her with a
new mantle at a cost of nine thousand dollars. The brothers were
willingly aided by the seven thousand women who work in the immense
tobacco factory, the average contribution of each donor being two
_centimos_ (two-fifths of a cent) a week during the preceding year. No
wonder that the Virgin seemed to stand proudly upon her silvered
pedestal, her gorgeous new mantle streaming out until it almost
touched the head of a white-vested girl who walked barefoot close
behind the litter, so fulfilling a vow made in extremity of illness.

Black and white were the banners and costumes of the third procession,
very effective through the deepening dusk. Their leading pageant was a
Gethsemane, famous for the beauty of the carving. Christ is
represented in prayer before an angel, who bears in one hand the cross
and in the other the cup of bitterness, while Peter, James, and John
are sleeping near their Master. These Passion groups are, with a few
exceptions of still earlier date, works of the seventeenth century,
the glorious period of Spanish art, the day of Murillo and Velazquez.
The most and best are from the hand of the Sevillian Montanes, of
chief repute in the Spanish school of polychrome sculpture, but this
Gethsemane was carved by his imitator, Roldan, whose daughter, La
Roldana, is accredited with the figure of the angel and with the
reliefs that adorn the pedestal.

Another Virgin, who, like all the rest, seemed a scintillation of gold
and jewels, swept by, and a new troop of Nazarenes, this time in
purple and white, passed with two august pageants,--the Descent from
the Cross and the Fifth Anguish of Mary. Then came two files of
ash-colored figures, who marshalled, between their rows of starry
tapers, each taper bending toward its opposite, a vivid presentation
of the Crowning with Thorns; and, after this, their Mary of the
Valley, noted for the gracious sweetness of her countenance. This
image is held to be one of Montanes's masterpieces in wood-carving.

Five processions had now passed, with their two pageants each, and the
hour was late, but we could not leave the balcony for anything so
commonplace as dinner. Far down the street of _Las Sierpes_ waved a
river of lights, announcing the advent of the most ancient of all the
Sevillian brotherhoods, Jesus of the Passion. The crowded _plaza_ rose
in reverence as the Crucifixion _paso_ was borne by, and Our Lady of
Mercy, too magnificent for her name, was greeted with rapturous
outcries.



Just how and when and where something in the way of food was taken, I
hardly know, but as this, the last of the Thursday evening
processions, passed in music out of the _plaza_, a few of us made
speed by a deserted side street to the cathedral. We were too late for
the _Miserere_, which was just closing in that surprising hubbub,
the stamping of feet and beating of canes and chairs against the
floor, by which Spanish piety is wont to "punish Judas." But we took
our station near by the entrance to the Royal Chapel, wherein had been
erected the grand Holy Week monument, in white and gold, shaped like a
temple, and shining with innumerable silver lamps and taper lights.
Within this monument the Host, commonly spoken of in Spain as _Su
Majestad_, had been solemnly placed the night before, much as the
mediaeval church used to lay the crucifix, with requiems, under the
High Altar on Good Friday, and joyously bring it forth again Easter
morning. But Spanish Catholicism is strangely indifferent to dates,
burying the Host on Wednesday and celebrating the Resurrection
Saturday.

All day long the Royal Chapel had been filled with relays upon relays
of kneeling worshippers, and the hush there had been so profound that
the hum of the tourist-haunted nave and the tumult of the streets
seemed faint and foreign to the hearing, like sounds a universe away.
Before this chapel entrance all the pageants, as they were borne in
silence through the cathedral, paused and did homage to the Host.
Having outstripped the procession, we had arrived in season to witness
three of these salutations. The Nazarenes, in passing, fell upon their
knees in the light of the great, gleaming monument, and each of the
heavy platforms was slowly swung about so that it faced this symbol of
Christ's sepulchre.

Yet there was something besides devotion in the cathedral. As the
crowd pressed close, we felt, more than once, a fumbling at our
pockets, and the little artist lost her purse. The rest of us
comforted her by saying over and over that she ought to have known
better than to bring it, and by severally relating how cautious we had
been on our own accounts.

It was hard upon eleven when we returned to the house, but the streets
were all alive with people. I went to the balcony at midnight, and
again at the stroke of one, and both times looked down upon a _plaza_
crossed and recrossed in all directions by talkative, eager groups.
Many of these restless promenaders had been able to get no lodgings,
and were walking to keep warm. The pressure upon the hotels was so
great that one desperate stranger this Thursday night paid twenty
dollars for a cot from ten o'clock till two, and private hospitality
was taxed to a degree that nothing but Spanish courtesy and
good-nature could ever have endured. In the house which harbored us,
for instance, we were all fitted in as compactly as the pieces of a
puzzle, when the unexpected friends began to arrive.

On Wednesday there appeared from the far north a man and wife,
acquaintances of ten years back. Our host and hostess greeted this
surprise party with Andalusian sunshine in their faces, and yielded up
their own room. Thursday morning there walked gayly in one of the
son's university classmates from Madrid. Don Pepe embraced him like a
brother, and surrendered the sofa, which was all he had left to give.
And this Thursday midnight, as a crowning touch, three more chums of
college days came clattering at the bell. Their welcome was as cordial
as if the household were pining for society. The tired maids, laughing
gleefully over the predicament, contributed their own mattresses and
pillows, and made up beds on the study floor, where Don Pepe camped
out with his comrades, to rise with a headache that lasted for days
after.

By two o'clock I had taken my station on the balcony for an all-night
vigil. The most of the family bore me company for the cogent reason
that they had nowhere to sleep, but the other guests of the house held
out for only an hour or two, and then went blinking to their repose.
My memory of the night is strangely divided between the dreamlike,
unearthly pomps and splendors streaming through the square below and
the kindly, cheery people who came and went about me. The senora,
still fresh and charming, although she has wept the deaths of fourteen
out of her nineteen children, was merrily relating, with weary head
against her husband's shoulder, her almost insuperable difficulties in
the way of furnishing her table. The milkman roundly declared that if
she wanted a double quantity of the precious fluid (and goat's milk at
that), she must make it up with water. There was no meat to be had in
the Catholic city during these holy days, and even her baker had
forsaken his oven and gone off to see the sights. And the
black-bearded senor, who, like his wife, had not been in bed for forty
odd hours, laughed at her and comforted her, puffed harder than ever
at his cigarette, and roguishly quoted the saying, "He whom God loves
has a house in Seville."

By two o'clock the seats on the grand stand were filling fast, the
_plaza_ hummed with excitement, the balconies resounded with song and
laughter, and the strong electric lights in front of the city hall
cast a hard, white brilliance over all the scene. The frying of
_calientes_, an Andalusian version of twisted doughnuts, was in savory
progress here and there on the outskirts of the throng, and our ever
thoughtful hostess did not fail to keep her balcony well supplied
with these crisp dainties.

The twinkling of taper lights, so warm and yellow under those pallid
globes of electric glare, appeared while people were still hurrying to
their places; but hundreds upon hundreds of black and gold figures had
paced by before the first of their _pasos_ came into view. For these
processions of the dawn, _de madrugada_, call out great numbers of the
devout, who would thus keep the last watch with their Lord. The clocks
struck three as the leading pageant, a very ancient image of Christ,
bearing a silver-mounted cross of tortoise-shell, halted before the
Alcalde. A white banner wrought with gold heralded the Virgin, who
rose, in glistening attire, from a golden lake of lights.

The wealthy _cofradia_ of San Lorenzo followed in their costly habits
of black velvet. They, too, conducted a pageant of Christ bearing His
cross, one of the most beautiful groups of Montanes, the pedestal
adorned with angels in relief. To the Christ, falling on the Via
Dolorosa, the brotherhood, with the usual disregard of historic
propriety, had given a royal mantle of ermine, embroidered with gold
and pearls. A large company of black-clad women, carrying candles,
walked behind the _paso_, on their penitential march of some eight
hours. Many of them were ladies delicately bred, whose diamonds
sparkled on the breast of the approaching Mary. For the Sevillian
senoras are accustomed to lend their most valuable gems to their
favorite Virgins for the _Semana Santa_, and San Lorenzo's Lady of
Grief is said to have worn this night the worth of millions. She
passed amid a great attendant throng, in such clouds of incense that
the eye could barely catch the shimmer of her silver pedestal, the
gleam of the golden broideries that almost hid the velvet of her
mantle, and the flashes and jets of light that shot from the
incredible treasure of jewels that she wore.

The third troop of Nazarenes, robed in white and violet, bore for
banner a white cross upon a violet ground. Their Christ-pageant
pictured Pilate in his judgment seat in the act of condemning the Son
of God to death. Jesus, guarded by armed soldiers, calmly confronts
the troubled judge, at whose knee wait two little pages with a basin
of water and towels.

And now came one of the most gorgeous features of the Holy Week
processions--a legion of Roman soldiers, attired as never Roman
soldiers were, in gold greaves and crimson tunics, with towering
snow-white plumes. But a splendid show they made as, marching to drum
and fife, they filed down _Las Sierpes_ and stretched "in never ending
line" across the _plaza_. Our most Holy Mary of Hope, who followed,
wearing a fair white tunic and a gold-embroidered mantle of green, the
color of the hopeful season, drowned the memory of that stern military
music in a silver concert of flutes.

After this sumptuous display, the fourth band of Nazarenes, gliding
through the _plaza_ between night and day in their garb of black and
white, could arouse but little enthusiasm, although their Crucifixion
was one of the most artistic, and their Lady of the Presentation had
her poorest garment of fine satin.

A pearly lustre was stealing through the sky, and the chill in the air
was thinning the rows of spectators on the grand stand, when
mysterious, dim-white shapes, like ghosts, bore by in utter silence a
pageant of Christ fainting beneath the burden of the cross. But soon
the clamor of drums and fifes ushered in another long array of Roman
soldiers, a rainbow host in red and pink and blue, crimson plumes
alternating with white, and golden shields with silver. The electric
lights, globed high overhead, took one look at this fantastic
cavalcade and went out with a gasp.

It was now clear day. Canaries began to sing in their cages, and
parrots to scream for chocolate. Sleepy-eyed servant-maids appeared on
the balconies, and market women, leading green-laden donkeys, peered
forth from the side streets into the square. The morning light made
havoc with the glamour of the pageants. Something frank and practical
in the sunshine stripped those candle-lighted litters of their
dignity. Busy people dodged through the procession lines, and one
Nazarene after another might be seen slipping out of the ranks and
hurrying awkwardly, in his cumbersome dress, with the half-burned
taper under his arm, to the refuge of his own mosquito-netting and
orange tree. The tired crowd grew critical and irreverent, and openly
railed upon the Virgin of this ghostly _cofradia_ because her velvet
mantle was comparatively plain. "Bah! how poor it is! Are we to sit
here all the night for such stingy shows as that?"

But the last brotherhood in the _madrugada_ processions had, with
their white frocks and blue caps and capes, suited themselves to the
colors of the day. The stumbling children, blind with sleep, whom
fathers were already leading off the square, turned back for a drowsy
gaze at the resplendent tunic of the Christ in the Via Dolorosa
_paso_, a tunic claimed to be the richest of all the garments worn by
the effigies of Jesus. So lovely was this trooping company in their
tints of sky and cloud, bearing a great blue banner and a shining
ivory cross, that they brought order and decorum with them.

The division that escorted the Virgin marched on with especial
steadiness, not a peaked cap drooping, nor a boyish acolyte faltering
under the weight of his tall gilded censer. This most Holy Mary of
Anguish, whose litter and canopy were all of white and gold, swept by
in triumphal peals of music while the clocks were striking six. In
some mental confusion, I said good night to the people I left on the
balcony, and good morning to the people I met on the stairs, and ate
my breakfast before I went to bed.

It seemed as if human nature could bear no more; the eyes ached with
seeing, and phantasmal processions went sweeping through our dreams;
yet Friday afternoon at five o'clock found our balcony, like all the
rest, full to overflowing. Some twenty thousand people were massed in
the _plaza_, and it was estimated that over one hundred thousand
waited along the line of march. Our Spanish entertainers, still
unrefreshed by any chance for sleep, were as gayly and punctiliously
attentive to their guests as ever, from our gallant host, who
presented the ladies with fragrant bouquets of roses and orange
blossoms, to the little pet of the household, who at the most
engrossing moments in the ceremonial would slip away from her
privileged stand on a footstool against the railing to summon any
member of the party who might be missing the spectacle.

The Spanish colors floated out from city hall and court-house, but the
great concourse below was all in hues of mourning, the black mantillas
often falling over dresses of plain purple. The senoritas in the
balconies had substituted knots of black ribbon for the customary
flowers in the hair. Jet trimmings abounded, and the waving fans were
black.

The coming procession, we were assured on every hand, would be the
most solemn of all and the most sumptuous. The habits of the Nazarenes
would be of satin, silk, and velvet. The images of Christ and the
Virgin would be attired with all possible magnificence of damask and
ermine, gold and jewels. Brotherhood would vie with brotherhood in
splendor, and one prodigy of luxury would succeed another.

The leading company, whose far-trailing robes carpeted the street with
fine black velvet, stood for the olive industry. This _cofradia_ had
been poor and unimportant for generations, but in recent years a
devoted brother, a manufacturer of olive packing-barrels, had poured
forth his accumulated fortune upon the society, with the result that
their _pasos_ are now second in ostentation and expense to none. The
donor, long since too feeble to bear his taper in the line, lives in
humble obscurity, but his old heart swells with joy this great day of
the year when he sees, following the elaborate carving of the
Crucifixion, the dazzling chariot of Our Lady of Solitude. Upon her
mantle, which enjoys the proud distinction of being the very costliest
of all, he has lavished twenty thousand dollars. Longer by a yard than
any of the others, it was yet unable to find place for all the gold
which the zealous Nazarene had given for it, and the residue was
bestowed about the pedestal and canopy. The _paso_ is so heavy with
gold that it requires a double force of men to carry it; but each of
these hidden bearers, getting air as best he can through a silver
breathing-tube, is sure of a dollar for his recompense as well as two
glasses of good wine.

  

All the adornment of the litter is of pure gold, and such wealth of
jewels glinted from the Virgin's glorious raiment that a triple force
of Civil Guards was detailed for her protection. Her ardent worshipper
has denied her nothing. The very columns that uphold her canopy are
exquisite in carving, and it is his yearly pride to see that her
clouds of incense are the thickest, and her train of musicians the
most extended, in all that glittering line.

The second _cofradia_ exhibited but a single pageant, relying for
effect upon the beauty of the sculpture. The Mater Dolorosa was bowed
in her desolation at the foot of the Holy Rood, from which hung only
the white folds of the winding-sheet.

But the third brotherhood had bethought themselves to introduce,
between their austere Crucifixion and their shining image of Mary,
another preposterous parade of Roman soldiers--flower-colored,
plume-tossing, butterfly creatures far too bright, if not too good,
"for human nature's daily food." One whiff from Caesar's iron breast
would have blown them away like soap bubbles.

The silversmiths trooped by in graver, more majestic state, their
purple velvet habits girded with gold cords. Upon a gilded pedestal,
wrought with high relief, was seen their Christ, bowed beneath a
precious cross of tortoise-shell and silver. Our Lady of Expectation
gleamed with gold and gems, and this haughty brotherhood received a
full meed of applause.

Black from top to toe was the fifth procession. Their Jesus of the Via
Dolorosa bent beneath a sombre cross of ebony embossed with gold, but
the blithe young voices of the countless choir-boys, singing like
birds before the dawn, ushered in a sun-bright image of Mary.

But something was amiss with the processional order. Where were the
stately ranks of Montserrat? Alas and alas! Scarcely had this
aristocratic _cofradia_ gone a hundred paces from their chapel when,
in the narrow street of Murillo, a leaning candle touched the lace
skirt of the Virgin and instantly all the front of the litter was in
flames. It was hardly a matter of minutes. From the balconies above
were dashed down pailfuls and pitcherfuls of water. The Nazarenes,
wrenching away the blue velvet mantle wondrously embroidered in gold
with castles, lions, and _fleurs de lis_, succeeded in rescuing a
ragged half of it, and the Civil Guards, drawing their swords and
forming a circle about the smoking litter, saved the jewels from
robbery. Perhaps the other _paso_, too, Christ of the Conversion of
the Penitent Thief, had some protecting influence. But in all this ado
about her finery, the poor Virgin's face, beloved for its winsome
look, was completely burned away. In sorry plight Our Lady of
Montserrat was hurried back to her chapel, and the swift rumor of the
disaster sent a superstitious trouble through the city.

But more and more solemnly the taper-bearing troops of Nazarenes
poured by with the culminating pictures of the Passion. These last
three _cofradias_ presented each a single pageant. An escort in dark
purple conducted an impressive Descent from the Cross. The Virgin, her
crowned head bowed in anguish, clasps the drooping body of Christ to
her heart, while John and Mary Magdalene look on in hopeless sorrow.
Figures in black and white came after, with their sixteenth-century
carving, Christ of the Dying Breath, beneath the cross standing Our
Lady of Tears. And last of all, in slow, sad movement, their white
trains streaming like a line of light along the stone-paved way,
passed the second brotherhood of San Lorenzo, bearing the Most Blessed
Virgin in her Solitude. The gold of her mantle seemed one with the
gold of the candle rays, and, for many a silent watcher, those
gliding, gleaming, spiritlike forms will move forever down a shining
path in memory. So closed the Holy Week processions.

"How sorry I am," said our host, with the Andalusian twinkle in his
eye. "It is almost eleven o'clock. Ladies and gentlemen, will you
please walk out to dinner?"

On Saturday morning we went early to the cathedral for the closing
rite. The Sagrario was thronged. Some of the senoras had brought low
folding chairs with them, others sat upon the floor, but most of that
innumerable congregation knelt or stood. We were all facing the great
purple veil which concealed the high altar, with Roldan's retablo of
the Descent from the Cross. There was an hour or more of expectation,
during which rosaries slipped through the fingers of many a veiled
nun, and the soft murmur of prayer came from strong men as well as
from pale-faced women. Suddenly, while a shock of thunder crashed from
the organ, hidden ministrants sharply drew on hidden cords, the purple
curtain parted in the midst, and the two folds rolled asunder,
revealing the high altar, with its carving of the accomplished
Passion. The organ poured forth jubilees of victory, all the bells of
the cathedral pealed together, _Gloria in Excelsis_ soared in choral
chant, and amid the awe-stricken multitudes fallen to their knees, _Su
Majestad_ was borne in priestly procession from the tomb in the Royal
Chapel to the candles and incense which awaited at the high altar that
triumphal coming.

Easter Sunday was celebrated by a bull-fight.


Chapter VIII. AN ANDALUSIAN TYPE

     "'True,' quoth Sancho: 'but I have heard say there are more
     friars in heaven than knights-errant.' 'It may be so,' replied
     Don Quixote, 'because their number is much greater than that
     of knights-errant.' 'And yet,' quoth Sancho, 'there are
     abundance of the errant sort.' 'Abundance indeed,' answered
     Don Quixote, 'but few who deserve the name of
     knights.'"--CERVANTES: _Don Quixote_.


It might have been in Seville, though it was not, that I met my most
_simpatico_ example of the Andalusian. He was of old Sierra stock,
merry as the sunshine and gracious as the shadows. Huge of build and
black as the blackest, he was as gentle as a great Newfoundland dog,
until some flying spark of a word set the dark fires blazing in his
eyes. This was no infrequent occurrence, for the travelling
Englishman, as frank as he is patriotic, cannot comprehend the zest
with which well-to-do Spaniards, even in time of war, escape military
service by a money payment. Not the height and girth of our young
giant, nor his cordial courtesy and winning playfulness, shielded him
from the blunt question, "Why didn't you go over to Cuba, a great
fellow like you, and fight for your flag?" His usual rejoinder was the
eloquent Southern shrug of the shoulder, twist of the eyebrow, and
waving lift of the hand, with the not easily answerable words, "And to
what good?" But now and then the query came from such a source or was
delivered with so keen a thrust that his guarded feeling outleaped
reserve. The sarcasms and mockeries that then surged from him in a
bitter torrent were directed chiefly against Spain, although the
American eagle rarely went scot-free. "Ah, yes, it is a fine fowl,
that! He has the far-seeing eye; he has the philanthropic beak and
claw!" But it was the golden lion of Spain against which his harshest
gibes were hurled--"_un animal domestico_, that does not bite."

No one of the party was a tithe as outspoken as our Spaniard himself
in condemning the errors of the Spanish campaign or censuring the
methods of the Spanish Government. If he turned angrily toward a
criticism from a foreigner, it was only, in the second instant, to
catch it up like a ball and toss it himself from one hand to the
other--like a ball that burns the fingers.

Such wrath can easily be the seamy side of love, and, in a way, the
man's national pride was measured by his national shame; but always
over these outbursts there brooded that something hopelessly resigned,
drearily fatalistic, which seems to vitiate the Spanish indignation
for any purposes of practical reform. To suggestions of sympathy he
responded with a pathetic weariness of manner, this handsome young
Hercules, so radiant with the joy of life, who, in his normal mood,
sprinkled mirth and mischief from him as a big dog shakes off water
drops.

"What can one do? I am a Spaniard. I say it to myself a hundred times
a day. I am a Spaniard, and I wish my country were worth the fighting
for, worth the dying for. But is it? Is it worth the toothache? God
knows the truth, and let it rest there. Oh, you need not tell me of
its past. It was once the most glorious of nations. Spaniards were
lords of the West. But--ah, I know, I know--Spain has never learned
how to rule her colonies. He who sows brambles reaps thorns. The
Church, too, has done much harm in Spain--not more harm than another.
I am a Catholic, but as I see it, priests differ from other men only
in this--in the cafe sit some bad men and many good, and in the choir
kneel some good priests and many bad. The devil lurks behind the
cross. But Spain will never give up her Church. It is burned in. You
are a heretic, and like my figure, do you not? It is burned in. There
is no hope for Spain but to sink her deep under the earth, and build a
new Spain on top. And why do I not work for that new Spain? How may a
man work? There is talk enough in Spain as it is. Most Spaniards talk
and do no more. They go to the cafes and, when they have emptied their
cups, they draw figures on the tables and they talk. That is all. The
new Spain will never come. What should it be? Oh, I know better what
it should not be. It should have no king. A republic--that is right.
Perhaps not a republic precisely like America. It may be," and the
melancholy sarcasm of the tone deepened, "there could be found
something even better. But Spain will not find it. Spain will find
nothing.

"What can one do? I know Spain too well. Now, hear! I am acquainted
with a _caballero_. I have been his friend ten years and more. But he
has had the luck, not I. For, first, when we were at the university,
he had a fortune left to him. He became betrothed to a senorita whom
he loved better than his eyelashes. He travelled for his pleasure to
Monte Carlo, and played his fortune all away in one week. He came back
to Madrid, and went to one of the Ministers, to whom his father had in
former days done a great service. My friend said: 'I am to marry. The
lady expects to share the fortune which I have lost. My position is
not honorable. I must have an opening, a chance to redeem myself, or I
shall stand disgraced before her.' The Minister sent him to one of the
Cuban custom-houses, and in two years he returned with great wealth.
On his wedding journey he spent a night at Monte Carlo and gambled it
away to the last _peseta_. A stranger had to lend him money to get
home with his bride. Was he not ashamed and troubled? Ashamed? I do
not know. But troubled? Yes, for he wanted to play longer. Every one
is as God has made him, and very often worse. Again he went to the
Minister, whose heart was softer than a ripe fig and who found him a
post in the Philippines. This time he made a fortune much quicker than
before, knowing better how to do unjustly, but a few weeks before the
war he came home and lost it all again at Monte Carlo. And now he is
horribly vexed, for it is another Minister, and, besides, there are no
colonies to enrich him any more.

"What use to care for Spain? No, no, no, no, no! Spain is a good
country to leave--that is all. And you do well to travel in Spain.
American ladies like change, and Spain is not America. Here you are
not only in a different land, but in a different century. You can say,
when you come out, that you have been journeying a hundred years ago."

On another occasion one of those pleasant individuals who would, as
the Spaniards say, "talk of a rope in the house of one who had been
hanged," saw fit to entertain the dinner-table with anecdotes of
Spanish cruelty.

"But Spaniards are not cruel," protested our young blackamoor in his
softest voice an hour later, stroking with one great hand the head of
a child who nestled against his knee. "What did that English fellow
mean? Why should any one think that Spaniards are cruel?"

I ran over in mind a few of the frightful stories of Las Casas, that
good Dominican friar who would not hold his peace when he saw the
braining of Indian babies and roasting of Indian chiefs. I remembered
how De Soto tossed his captives to the bloodhounds, and what
atrocities were wrought in the tranquil realm of the Incas; I recalled
the horrors of the Inquisition, but these things were of the past. So
I answered, "Perhaps the bull-fights have done something to give
foreigners that impression."

Unlike many educated Spaniards who would rather attend the bull-fights
than defend them, he squared his shoulders for an oration.

"The bull-fights? But why? Bull-fights are not cruel--not more cruel
than other sports in other countries. I have been told of prize-fights
in America. I beg your pardon. I see by your look that you do not like
them. And, in truth, I do not altogether like the bull-fights. The
horses! They are blindfolded, and it is short, but I have seen--ah,
yes! You would not wish to hear what I have seen. I have been often
sorry for the horses. Yet some pain is necessary in everything, is it
not? In nature, perhaps? In society, perhaps? Even, if you will pardon
the illustration, in the deliverance of the Filipinos from Spanish
tyranny?"

I briefly suggested that there was no element of necessity in
bull-fights.

The waving hand apologized gently for dissent.

"But, yes! The bulls are killed for food. That is what foreigners do
not seem to understand. It may be ugly, but it is universal. To supply
men with meat, to feed great cities with the flesh of beasts--it is
not pleasant to think of that too closely. But how to help it? Do you
not have slaughter-houses in America? These also we have in Spain. I
have visited one. It seemed to me much worse than the bull-ring.
Faugh! I did not like it. The cattle stood trembling, one behind
another, waiting for the blow. I should not like to die like that. I
would rather die in the wrath of battle like a _toro bravo_. Oh, it is
not cruel. Do not think it. For these bulls feel no fear. It is fear
that degrades. They may feel pain, but I doubt--I doubt. They feel the
wildness of anger, and they charge and charge again until the
_estocada_, the death stab. That is not so bad a way to die, is it?
Any man would choose it rather than to stand in terror, bound and
helpless, hearing the others fall under the axe and seeing his turn
draw near. Yes, yes! The bull-ring rather than the slaughter-house for
me!"

This was a novel view of the case to the auditor, who ignominiously
shifted her ground.

"But what country uses the slaughter-house as a spectacle and a sport?
It is one thing to take life for food, and another to make a holiday
of the death struggle."

Again that deprecatory waving of the hands.

"I beg your pardon. I do not know how it is in America. Perhaps"
[circumflex accent] "all is merciful and noble there. But when I was
in England I saw something of the chase and of the autumn shooting. I
saw a poor little fox hunted to the death. It was not for food. The
dogs tore him. I saw wounded birds left in the cover to die. It was
too much trouble to gather them all up. And the deer? Does not the
stag suffer more in his flight than the bull in his struggle? I
believe it. To run and run and run, always growing weaker, while the
chase comes nearer--that is an agony. The rage of combat has no terror
in it. I would not die like the deer, hunted down by packs of dogs and
men--and ladies. I would die like the bull, hearing the cheers of the
multitude."

The big fellow bent over the baby that was dropping to sleep against
his knee, and slipped the drowsy little body, deftly and tenderly, to
a sofa. Such sweetness flooded the soft black eyes, as they were
lifted from the child, that it was hard to imagine them sparkling with
savage delight over the bloody scenes of the _corrida de toros_. I
asked impulsively how long it was since he had seen a bull-fight.
Brows and hands and shoulders were swift to express their appreciation
of the bearings of the question, and the voice became very music in
courteous acquiescence.

"Ah, it is four years. Of course, I was much younger then. Yes, yes!
It might not please me now. _Quien sabe?_ And yet--I beg your
pardon--I think I shall go next Sunday in Madrid, on my way to Paris.
It is so weary in London on the Sundays. It was always colder Sunday,
and there was not even a cafe. There was nowhere to go. There was
nothing to do. Why is that good? At the bull-fight one feels the joy
of life. Is it more religious to sit dull and dismal by the fire? I
had no use for the churches. Walking is not amusing, unless the sun
shines and there is something gay to see. I do not like tea, and I do
not care for reading. Spaniards like to laugh and be merry, and when
there is nothing to laugh for, life is a heaviness. There is no
laughter in a London Sunday. I hope Paris will be better, though I
believe there are no bull-fights there as yet. You are not pleased
with me, but let me tell you why I love the _corrida_. It is not for
the horses, you remember. I have sometimes looked away. But why should
I pity the bulls, when they are mad with battle? They do not pity
themselves. They are glad in their fury, and I am glad in seeing it.
But I am more glad in the activity and daring of the men. When they
run risks, that is what makes me cheer. It is not that I would have
them hurt. I am proud to find men brave. And I am excited and eager to
see if they escape. Do you not understand? If you would go
yourself--just once--no? Is it always no? Then let me tell you what is
the best of all. It is to stand near the entrance and watch the people
pass in, all dressed in their holiday clothes, and all with holiday
faces. It is good and beautiful to see them--especially the ladies."

The most attractive qualities of our young Spaniard were his mirth and
courtesy. His merriment was so spontaneous and so buoyant that his
grace of manner, always tempered to time and place and person, became
the more apparent. His humor dwelt, nevertheless, in the borderlands
of irony, and it was conceivable that the rubs of later life might
enrich its pungency at the cost of its kindliness. He was excellent at
games (not sports), especially the game of courtliness (not
helpfulness). The letter was not posted, the message slipped his
memory, the errand was done amiss, but his apologies were poetry. He
made a pretty play of the slightest social intercourse. We would open
our Baedeker at the map which we had already, in crossing Spain,
unfolded some hundred times. He would spring as lightly to his feet as
if his mighty bulk were made of feathers, and stand, half bowing,
arching his eyebrows in appeal, spreading out his hands in offer of
assistance, but not venturing to approach them toward the book until
it was definitely tendered him. Then he would receive it with
elaborate delicacy of touch, unfold the creased sheet with a score of
varied little flourishes, and restore the volume with a whole fresh
series of gesticulatory airs and graces. The next instant he would
peep up from under his black lashes to detect the alloy of amusement
in our gratitude, and drop his face flat upon the table in a boyish
bubble of laughter, saying:--

"Ah! But you think we Spaniards make much of little things. It is
true. We are best at what is least useful."

Light-hearted Andalusian though he was, he had full share of the
energy and enterprise of young manhood. Like the dons of long ago, he
was equipping himself for the great Western adventure. Despite his
Spanish wrath against America, she had for him a persistent
fascination. All his ambitions were bent on a business career in New
York, the El Dorado of his imagination. But it was no longer, at the
end of the nineteenth century, a case of leaping aboard a galleon and
waving a Toledo blade in air. The commercial career demands, so he
fancied, that its knight go forth armed cap-a-pie in the commercial
tongues. Thus he had spent four years of his youth and half of his
patrimony in London and Berlin, and now, after this hasty visit home,
purposed to go to Paris, for a year or two of French. This unsettled
life was little to his liking, but beyond gleamed the vision of a Wall
Street fortune.

Yet even now, at the outset of his task, a frequent lethargy would
steal over his young vigor. It was curious to see, when the March wind
blew chill or the French verbs waxed crabbed, how all his bearing lost
its beauty. There was a central dignity that did not lapse, but the
brightness and effectiveness were gone. His big body drooped and
looked lumpish. His comely face was clouded by an animal sluggishness
of expression. Foreign grimaces twisted across it, and something very
like a grunt issued from beneath his cherished first mustache. His
sarcasm became a little savage. He would sit for hours in a brooding
fit, and, when an inexorable call to action came, obey it with a look
of dreary patience older than his years. It was as if something
inherent in his nature, independent of his will, weighed upon him and
dragged him down. The Spain at which he gibed and from which he would
have cut himself away was yet a millstone about his neck. He was in
the heyday of his youth, progressive and determined, but the torpid
blood of an aged people clogged his veins. Spain will never lose her
hold on him, despite his strongest efforts. His children may be
citizens of the great Republic, but he must be a foreigner to the end.
He must wander a stranger in strange cities, puzzling his Spanish wits
over alien phrases and fashions and ideals, unless, indeed, his spirit
loses edge, and he drifts into chill apathy of disappointment on
finding that his golden castles in America are wrought of that same
old dream-stuff which used to be the monopoly of castles in Spain.

But it is best to leave ill-boding to the gypsies. Good luck may take
a liking to him, if only for the music of his laugh. For even if
blithe heart and courtly bearing bring no high cash value in the
modern business market, they may smooth the road to simple happiness.
Moreover, a Spaniard dearly loves a game of chance, and at the worst,
our fortune-seeker will have thrown his dice. His may seem to the
Yankee onlooker but a losing play, and yet--who knows? "He who sings
frightens away his ills." God's blessing sails in summer clouds as
lightly as in costly pleasure yachts. Out of a shaft of sunshine, a
cup of chocolate, and a cigarette, this Andalusian immigrant, though
stranded in an East Side tenement, may get more luxury than can be
purchased by a multi-millionaire.


Chapter IX. A BULL-FIGHT

the famous Pepe Hillo, who, like Candido, perished in the ring; a second Romero,
said to have killed five thousand six hundred bulls; Montes the
brick-layer, and a bloody band of followers. Andalusia is--alas!--the
classic soil of the bull-fight, as every peasant knows, and Seville
the top of Andalusia.

     "I have a handsome lover,
         Too bold to fear the Devil,
     And he's the best _torero_
         In all the town of Seville."


If there is a temporary dearth of saint days, Spanish ingenuity will
nevertheless find excuse for _corridas_. Bulls must bleed for holy
charity,--for hospitals, foundling asylums, the families of workmen
out on strike. If the French squadron is at Cadiz, hospitality demands
a bull-fight. In the interests of popular education, an historical
_corrida_ was arranged, with instructed _toreros_ to display the
special styles of bull-killing that have prevailed from the Cid to
Guerrita. 

It was on a Wednesday afternoon, at one of the three grand _corridas_
of the Seville _Feria_, that I became an accomplice in this Spanish
crime. Our friends in Seville, people of cultivation and liberal
views, had declared from the first that we could have no conception of
Spanish life and character without sharing in the national _fiesta_.
"We ourselves are not enthusiasts," they said. "In fact, we disapprove
the bull-fight. We regard it as demoralizing to the community at
large. It is, nevertheless, a thing scientific, artistic, heroic,
_Spanish_. Besides, a large portion of the proceeds goes to charity.
We do not attend the _corridas_, except now and then, especially when
we have foreign guests who wish to see them. Before going they all
regard bull-fighting as you do, as an atrocity, a barbarity, but
invariably they return from the _Plaza de Toros_ filled with delight
and admiration. They say their previous ideas were all wrong, that it
is a noble and splendid spectacle, that they want to see it again and
again, that they cannot be too grateful to us for having delivered
them from prejudice."

I winced at the word. I have a prejudice against being prejudiced, and
to the bull-fight I went.

My yielding came too late for securing places in a box or in any part
of the house from which one can make exit during the performance. Our
gory-looking tickets admitted us to the uppermost row of high,
whitewashed, stone seats of the circus proper, where we were soon
inextricably wedged in by the human mass that formed around and below
us. The hour of waiting passed merrily enough. The open amphitheatre,
jammed to its full capacity of fourteen thousand, lay half in
brilliant sunlight and half in creeping shadow. Above us arched the
glowing blue sky of Seville, pricked by the rosy Giralda, and from
time to time a strong-winged bird flew over. The great arena, strewn
with yellow sand, was enclosed by a dark red barrier of wood, about
the height of a man. This was encircled, at a little distance, by a
more secure and higher wall of stone. The concourse was largely
composed of men, both roughs and gentles, but there was no lack of
ladies, elegantly dressed, nor of children. Two sweet little girls in
white-feathered hats were just in front of us, dancing up and down to
relieve the thrills of expectancy. White mantillas, pinned with
jewels, bent from the boxes, while the daughters of the people dazzled
the eye with their festival display of Manila shawls, some pure white,
some with colored figures on a white ground or a black, and some a
rainbow maze of capricious needle-work. The rich-hued blossoms of
Andalusia were worn in the hair and on the breast. The sunny side of
the circus was brightly dotted by parasols, orange, green, vermilion,
and fans in all the cardinal colors twinkled like a shivered
kaleidoscope. 

Three more years of the deep,
green river-reeds and the sweet Andalusian sunshine, three years of
free, far range and glad companionship, and then the end. His days had
been exempt from burden only to save his wild young strength for the
final tragedy. One summer morning those traitors known as decoy-oxen,
with bells about the neck, came trotting into the herd. The noble
bulls, now at their best hour of life, the glory of their kind,
welcomed these cunning guests with frank delight and interest, and
were easily induced to follow them and their tinkling bells across the
rich pastures, along rough country roads, even to the city itself and
the fatal _Plaza de Toros_. The herdsmen with their ready pikes
galloped behind the drove, and everywhere along the way peasants and
townsfolk would fall in for a mile or two to help in urging the
excited animals onward to their cruel doom.

It was Guerrita, Guerrita the adored, Guerrita in gold-laced jacket and
violet trousers, who struck the ultimate blow, and so cleverly that
_sombreros_ and cigarettes, oranges and pocket-flasks, came raining,
amid furies of applause, into the arena. This was such a proud moment
as he had dreamed of long ago in the Cordova slaughter-house, when,
the little son of the slaughter-house porter, he had stolen from his
bed at midnight to play _al toro_ with the calves, and then and there
had solemnly dedicated himself to the glorious profession. Now the
master of his art and the idol of all Spain, easily making his
seventy-five thousand dollars a year, earning, in fact, three thousand
on that single afternoon, Guerrita little foresaw that with the coming
autumn he should go on pilgrimage to _La Virgen del Pilar_, and before
her beloved shrine at Saragossa cut off his bull-fighter's pigtail and
renounce the ring.

Chapter X. GYPSIES

There are wealthy gypsies, whose wives and daughters go arrayed with
the utmost elegance of fashion, in several Spanish cities. Seville has
her gypsy lawyer, but her gypsy bull-fighter, who died two years ago,
was held to reflect even greater credit on the parent stock.

On the Alhambra hill the gypsies, who scent tourists from afar and
troop thither, on the track of newly arrived parties, like wolves to
their banquet, are picturesque figures enough, the men in peaked hats,
spangled jackets, and sashes of red silk, the women with bright
handkerchiefs bound over their raven hair, large silver earrings, gay
bodices, and short, flounced petticoats.

There is one old _gitano_, in resplendent attire, who haunts the
Alhambra doors and introduces himself to visitors, with bows queerly
compounded of condescension and supplication, as the King of the
Gypsies, modestly offering his photograph for a _peseta_. If you turn
to your attendant Spaniard and ask, _sotto voce_, "But is this truly
the Gypsy King?" you will receive a prompt affirmative, while the
quick-witted old masquerader strikes a royal attitude, rolls his eyes
prodigiously, and twirls his three-cornered hat at arm's length above
his head, until its tinsel ornaments sparkle like crown jewels. But no
sooner is his Majesty well out of hearing than your guide hastens to
eat his own words. "No, no, no! He is not the King of the Gypsies, but
he is a gypsy, yes, and it is better not to have his ill will."

Whether this hardened pretender could cast the evil eye or not, we
never knew, for having bought two of his pictures at the first onset,
we suffered ever afterward the sunshine of his favor. In fact we often
made a wide detour rather than pass him on the hill, for he would
spring to his feet at our remotest approach and stand bowing like an
image of perpetual motion, his hat brandished high in air, until our
utmost in the way of answering nods and smiles seemed by contrast
sheer democratic incivility.

The swarthy faces and glittering eyes of the gypsies meet one
everywhere in the Granada streets, but to see them in their own
precinct it is necessary to take off your watch, empty your pockets of
all but small silver and coppers, and go to the Albaicin. This hill,
parted from the Alhambra by the deep ravine of the gold-bearing Darro,
was in Moorish times the chosen residence of the aristocracy. Still
Arabian arches span the gorge, and many of the toppling old houses
that lean over the swift, mountain-born current, shabby as they look
to the passer-by, are beautiful within with arabesque and fretwork,
carven niches, delicate columns and open patios, where fountains still
gush and orange blossoms still shed fragrance. Such degenerate palaces
are often occupied by the better class of gypsies, those who traffic
in horses, as well as in donkeys, while their women, grouped in the
courts and doorways, embroider with rainbow wools, in all fantastic
patterns, the stout mantles of the Andalusian mountaineers.

As we climbed the Albaicin, fronting as it does the hill of the
Alhambra, the exceeding beauty of the view at first claimed all our
power of seeing. Below was the gray sweep of the city and beyond the
fruitful plain of Granada, its vivid green shading into a far-off
dimness like the sea. Just opposite us rose the fortress of the
Alhambra, a proud though broken girdle of walls and towers, while in
the background soared the dazzling snow peaks of the Sierra Nevada,
glistening with unbearable splendor under the intense blue of the
Andalusian sky.

In Seville, too, the gypsies have their own quarter, but in proportion
as Seville is a gentler city than Granada, so are the looks and
manners of her gypsy population more attractive. Crossing the yellow
Guadalquivir by the bridge of Isabel Segunda, we come immediately on
the picturesque, dark-visaged figures, with their uneffaced suggestion
of wildness, of freedom, of traditions apart from the common humdrum
of humanity. The boy, clad in one fluttering garment, who is
perilously balancing his slender brown body on the iron rail; the
bright-kerchiefed young mother, thrusting her tiny black bantling into
our faces; the silent, swarthy men who lean along the bridge side,
lithe even in their lounging;--all have a latent fierceness in their
look. Their eyes are keen as knives--strange eyes, whose glitter masks
the depth. But as we go on into the potter's suburb of Triana, into
the thick of the gypsy life, we are not more seriously molested than
by the continual begging, nor is this the rough, imperious begging of
Granada; a flavor of Sevillian grace and fun has passed upon it. Offer
this bush-headed lad, pleading starvation, the orange he has just
tossed away, and he will double up over the joke and take to his
little bare heels. Give to the fawning sibyl who insists on telling
your fortune a red rose for her hair, and the chances are that she
will rest content. But the time to see the gypsies in their glory is
during the three days and nights of the _Feria_.

On the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth of April Seville annually
keeps, on the _Prado de San Sebastian_, where the Inquisition used to
light its fires, the blithest of spring festivals. The _Feria_ is a
fair, but much more than a fair. There are droves upon droves of
horses, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep, and pigs. There are rows upon
rows of booths with toys, booths with nuts and candies, booths with
the gay-handled Albacete knives and daggers. There are baskets upon
baskets of rainbow fans, mimic fighting cocks, oranges, and other
cheap Sevillian specialties. Cooling drinks are on sale at every turn,
but there is no drunkenness. There are thousands and tens of thousands
of people in motion, but there is no bustling, no elbowing, no
rudeness of pressure. Dainty little children wander alone in that
tremendous throng. The order and tranquillity that prevail by day and
night in this multitude of merrymakers render it possible for the
_Feria_ to be what it is. For during these enchanted April hours even
the noblest families of Seville come forth from the proud seclusion of
their patios and live in _casetas_, little rustic houses that are
scarcely more than open tents, exposed to the gaze of every passer-by.

A lofty bridge, crossed by two broad flights of stairs and tapering to
a tower, stands at the intersection of the three chief _Feria_
avenues. The bridge is brilliantly illuminated by night, and
close-set globes of gas, looped on running tubes along both sides of
these three festal streets, pour floods of light into the _casetas_.
Chinese lanterns in red and yellow abound, and lines of banner-staffs
flaunt the Spanish colors. The _casetas_ are usually constructed of
white canvas on a framework of light-brown fretwood, though the
materials are sometimes more durable.

Clubhouses are large and elaborate, and individual taste varies the
aspect of the private tents. The more important families of Seville
own their _casetas_, but in general these airy abodes are rented from
year to year, the price for the three days of the _Feria_ ranging from
twenty-five dollars on the central avenue to five dollars for the more
remote houselets on the two streets that branch off at right angles.
The numerous byways are occupied by cafes, booths, penny shows, and
the like, the gypsies having one side of a lane to themselves. The
other side is given over to circus-rings, merry-go-rounds,
cradle-swings marked "For Havana," "For Manila," "For Madrid," dancing
dwarfs, braying bands, caged bulls, and tents provided with peepholes
through which one may see "The Glorious Victory of the Spanish Troops
at Santiago," and other surprising panoramas of the recent war. These
are in high favor with soldiers and small boys, whose black heads bump
together at every aperture.

Such attractions are especially potent over the country folk, who come
jogging into Seville during fair time, mounted two or three together
on jaded horses, sorry mules, and even on indignant little donkeys.
Their peasant costumes add richly to the charm of the spectacle, and
their simplicity makes them an easy spoil for the canny folk of Egypt.
You see them especially in the cool of the early morning, when trade
in cattle is at its liveliest. Ten to one they have been fleeced
already by the _gitanos_, who, out in the great meadow where the
live-stock is exposed for sale, have their own corner for "dead
donkeys," as the Sevillians term the decrepit old beasts that have
been magically spruced up for the occasion. Cervantes has his jest at
"a gypsy's ass, with quicksilver in its ears."


The _Feria_ presents its most quiet aspect during the afternoon. Some
twenty or thirty thousand of the promenaders have been drawn off by
the superior attraction of the bull-fight, and others have retired for
their siestas. Yet there are thousands left. This is a grand time for
the children, who disport themselves in the avenues with whistles,
swords, balls, kites, and other trophies from the toy booths. These
little people are exquisitely dressed, often in the old Andalusian
costumes, and tiny lad and tiny lass, of aristocratic look and
bearing, may be seen tripping together through one of the graceful
national dances in the midst of a sidewalk throng. The toddlers, too,
are out, under charge of happy nursemaids.

Even the babies have been brought to the fair, and lie, contentedly
sucking their rosy thumbs, in the doorways of the _casetas_. The lords
of these doll-houses are enjoying peaceful smokes together in the
background of the open parlors, which are furnished with as many
chairs as possible, a piano, and a central stand of flowers; while
semicircles of silent ladies, languidly waving the most exquisite of
fans, sit nearer the front, watching the ceaseless stream of
pedestrians, and beyond these the double procession of carriages,
which keep close rank as they advance on one side of the avenue and
return on the other. It is bad form not to go to the _Feria_ once at
least in a carriage. Large families of limited means hire spacious
vehicles resembling omnibuses, and, squeezed together in two opposite
rows, drive up and down the three chief streets for hours.

There are crested landaus, with handsome horses, gay donkey-carts,
decked out with wreaths and tassels, shabby cabs, sporting red and
yellow ribbons on their whips, tooting coaches--every sort and kind of
contrivance for relieving humanity of its own weight. There are
mounted cavaliers in plenty, and occasionally, under due masculine
escort, a fair-haired English girl rides by, or a group of Spanish
senoras, who have come into Seville on horseback from their country
homes. But all this movement is slow and dreamy, the play of the
children being as gentle as the waving of the fans.

In the evening, from eight till one, the _Feria_ is perfect Fairyland.
Under the light of those clustered gas globes and butterfly-colored
lanterns pass and repass the loveliest women of the world. Beautifully
clad as the senoritas have been during morning and afternoon, their
evening toilets excel and crown the rest. White-robed, white-sandalled,
their brown, bewitching faces peeping out from the lace folds of white
mantillas, with white shawls, embroidered in glowing hues, folded over
the arm, and delicate white fans in hand, they look the very poetry of
maidenhood. Months of saving, weeks of stitching, these costumes may
have cost, but the _Feria_ is, above all, a marriage mart, and the
Andalusian girl, usually so strictly guarded, so jealously secluded,
never allowed to walk or shop alone, is now on exhibition. As these
radiant forms glide along the avenues, the men who meet them coolly
bend and look full into their faces, scanning line and feature with
the critical air of connoisseurs. But well these cavaliers illustrate
the Andalusian catch:--

     "Because I look thee in the face,
       Set not for this thy hopes too high,
     For many go to the market-place
       To see and not to buy."

The girl's opportunity is in her dancing. Every Andalusian woman, high
or low, knows the _Sevillana_. Some have been trained in it by
accredited teachers of the art, but the most learn the dance in
childhood, as naturally as they learn to speak and sing. They are
never weary of dancing it, morning, noon, and night, two girls
together, or a girl and a lad, but such dancing is confined to the
Moorish privacy of the Spanish home--except in Fair time. Then the
whole world may stand before the _casetas_ and see the choicest
daughters of Seville dancing the dance that is very coquetry in
motion. Rows of girls awaiting their turn, and of matrons who are
chaperoning the spectacle, sit about the three sides of the mimic
drawing-room. A dense crowd of men, crying "_Ole! Ole!_" and
commenting as freely on the figures and postures of the dancers as if
they were ballet artistes in a cafe chantant, is gathered close in
front. For their view these rhythmic maidens dance on, hour after
hour, until their great, dusky eyes are dim with sleep. The tassels of
curly ribbon, tinted to match the dainty touches of color in their
costumes, seem to droop in exhaustion from the tossing castanets. What
matter? For a Spanish girl to reach her twenty-fifth birthday without
a _novio_ is a tragedy of failure, and these tired dancers are well
aware that _caballeros_ are making the rounds from _caseta_ to
_caseta_, on purpose to select a wife.

Chapter XI. THE ROUTE OF THE SILVER FLEETS

     "Paul, the Physician, to Cristobal Colombo, greeting. I
     perceive your magnificent and great desire to find a way to
     where the spices grow."

     "And thus leade they their lyves in fullfilling the holy
     hunger of golde. But the more they fill their handes with
     finding, the more increaseth their covetous desire."
                                    --_Decades in the New Worlde._


I wanted to go from Seville to Cadiz by water. I longed to sail by the
"Silver Road" in the wake of the silver fleets. The little artist, as
befitted her youth, preferred a Manila shawl to that historic
pilgrimage. So I proposed to make this trifling trip alone.

Don Jose was shocked. Merriest and most indulgent of hosts, he was
inclined at this point to play the tyrant. If I must see Cadiz, well
and good. He would take me to the morning express and put me under
charge of the conductor. 

I appreciated the kindness involved in this very Andalusian
programme, but otherwise it did not appeal to me. That was not the way
Columbus went, nor Cortes. And much as I delighted in the Alhambra,
and the Mosque of Cordova, and the Alcazar of Seville, I did not feel
called upon to bow a New England bonnet beneath the Moorish yoke.

Thus Don Jose and I found ourselves quietly engaged in an
Hispano-American contest. He heartily disapproved of my going, even by
train. "_Una senora sola!_ It is not the custom in Andalusia." His
plan of campaign consisted in deferring the arrangements from day to
day. "_Manana!_" Whenever I attempted to set a time for departure he
blandly assented, and presently projected some irresistibly attractive
excursion for that very date. His household were all with him. His
wife had not been able to procure the particular _dulces_
indispensable to a traveller's luncheon. Even my faithless comrade,
draped in her flower-garden shawl, practised the steps of a
_seguidilla_ to the rattle of the castanets and laughed at my defeats.

At last, grown desperate, I suavely announced at the Sunday dinner
table that I was going to Cadiz that week. My host said, "_Bueno!_"
and my hostess, "_Muy bien!_" But there was no surrender in their
tones. On Monday, instead of writing the requisite notes to these
relays of protectors along the route, Don Jose took us himself, on a
mimic steamboat, for a judicious distance down the Guadalquivir.
Tuesday he put me off with Roman ruins, and Wednesday with a private
gallery of Murillos. By Thursday I grew insistent, and, with shrug and
sigh, he finally consented to my going by train on Friday. I still
urged the boat, but he heaped up a thousand difficulties. There wasn't
any; it would be overcrowded; I should be seasick; the boat would
arrive, wherever it might arrive, too late for my train, whatever my
train might be. Compromise is always becoming, and I agreed to take
the nine o'clock express in the morning.

After the extended Spanish farewells, for to kiss on both cheeks and
be kissed on both cheeks down a long feminine line, mother, daughters,
and maid-servants, is no hasty ceremony, I sallied forth at half-past
eight with Don Jose in attendance. He called a cab, but in Spain the
cabbies are men and brothers, and this one, on learning our
destination, declared that the train did not start until half-past
nine and it was much better for a lady to wait _en casa_ than at the
depot. This additional guardianship goaded me to active remonstrance.
Why not take the cab for the hour and look up a procession on our way
to the station? There are always processions in Seville. This appealed
to both the pleasure-loving Spaniards, and we drove into the palmy
_Plaza de San Fernando_, where an array of military bands was
serenading some civic dignitary.

The music was of the best, and we fell in with the large and varied
retinue that escorted the musicians to the palace of the archbishop.
As they were rousing him from his reverend slumbers with _La Marcha de
Cadiz_, I caught a twinkle in Don Jose's eye. Did he hope to keep me
chasing after those bands all the forenoon? I awakened the cabman,
whom the music had lulled into the easy Andalusian doze, and we
clattered off to the station. Of all silent and forsaken places! I
looked suspiciously at Don Jose, whose swarthy countenance wore an
overdone expression of innocent surprise. A solitary official
sauntered out.

"Good morning, senor! Is the express gone?" asked the driver.

"Good morning, senor! There isn't any express to-day," was the reply.
"The express runs only Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays."

"What a pity," cooed Don Jose, contentedly. "You will have to wait
till to-morrow."

"Yes, you can go to-morrow," indulgently added the driver, and the
official chimed sweetly in, "_Manana por la manana!_"

"But is there no other train to-day?" I asked.

The official admitted that there was one at three o'clock. Don Jose
gave him a reproachful glance.

"But you do not want to go by train," said my ingenious host. "Perhaps
to-morrow you can go by steamboat."

"Perhaps I can go by steamboat now," I returned, seizing my
opportunity. "When does that boat start?"

Nobody knew. I asked the cabman to drive us to the Golden Tower, off
which sea-going vessels usually anchor. Don Jose fell back in his
seat, exhausted.

The cabman drove so fast, for Seville, that we ran into a donkey and
made a paralyzed beggar jump, but we reached the river in time to see
a small steamer just in the act of swinging loose from the pier. In
the excitement of the moment Don Jose forgot everything save the
necessity of properly presenting me to the captain, and I, for my
part, was absorbed in the ecstasy of sailing from the foot of the
Golden Tower along the Silver Road.

It was not until a rod of water lay between boat and wharf that the
captain shouted to Don Jose, who struck an attitude of utter
consternation, that this craft went only to Bonanza, and no
connection could be made from there to Cadiz until the following
afternoon. And I, mindful of the austere dignity that befitted these
critical circumstances, could not even laugh.

It was a dirty little boat, with a malodorous cargo of fish, and for
passengers two soldiers, two peasants, and a commercial traveller. But
what of that? I was sailing on a treasure ship of the Indies, one of
those lofty galleons of Spain, "rowed by thrice one hundred slaves and
gay with streamers, banners, music," that had delivered at the Golden
Tower her tribute from the hoard of the Incas, and was proudly bearing
back to the open roads of Cadiz.

We dropped down past a noble line of deep-sea merchantmen, from
Marseilles, Hamburg, and far-away ports of Norway and Sweden. We
passed fishing boats casting their nets, and met a stately Spanish
bark, the _Calderon_. On the shores we caught glimpses of orange grove
and olive orchard, lines of osiers and white poplars, and we paused at
the little town of Coria, famous for its earthen jars, to land one of
our peasants, while a jolly priest, whose plain black garb was
relieved by a vermilion parasol, tossed down cigars to his friends
among the sailors.

Then our galleon pursued her course into the flat and desolate regions
of the _marismas_. These great salt marshes of the Guadalquivir,
scarcely more than a bog in winter, serve as pasture for herds of
hardy sheep and for those droves of mighty bulls bred in Andalusia to
die in the arenas of all Spain. For long stretches the green bank
would be lined with the glorious creatures, standing like ebony
statues deep amid the reeds, some entirely black, and many black with
slight markings of white. The Guadalquivir intersects in triple
channel this unpeopled waste, concerning whose profusion of plant life
and animal life English hunters tell strange tales. They report flocks
of rosy flamingoes, three hundred or five hundred in a column,
"glinting in the sunshine like a pink cloud," and muddy islets studded
thick with colonies of flamingo nests. Most wonderful of all, the
camel, that ancient and serious beast of burden, a figure pertaining
in all imaginations to the arid, sandy desert, keeps holiday in these
huge swamps. It seems that, in 1829, a herd of camels was brought into
the province of Cadiz, from the Canaries, for transport service in
road-building and the like, and for trial in agriculture. But the
peculiar distaste of horses for these humpy monsters spoiled the
scheme, and the camels, increased to some eighty in number, took
merrily to the marshes, where, in defiance of all caravan tradition,
they thrive in aquatic liberty. The fascination of this wilderness
reached even the dingy steamer deck. Gulls, ducks, and all manner of
wild fowl flashed in the sunshine, which often made the winding river,
as tawny as our James, sparkle like liquid gold.

If only it had been gold indeed, and had kept the traceries of the
Roman keels that have traversed it, the Vandal swords whose red it has
washed away, the Moorish faces it has mirrored, the Spanish--

"_Usted come?_"

It might have been Cortes who was offering that bowl of _puchero_, but
no! Cortes would have mixed it in his plumy helmet and stirred it with
that thin, keen sword one may see in the Madrid _Armeria_. This was a
barefooted cabin boy, in blue linen blouse and patched blue trousers,
with a scarlet cloth cap tied over his head by means of an
orange-colored handkerchief. The dancing eyes that lit his shy brown
face had sea blues in them. He was a winsome little fellow enough, but
I did not incline to his cookery. While I was watching river, shores,
and herds and chatting with the _simpatico_ sailor, who, taking his
cue from my look, expressed the deepest abhorrence of the bull-fights,
which, I make no doubt, he would sell his dinner, jacket, bed, even
his guitar, to see, I had taken secret note of the cuisine. This
child, who could not have counted his twelfth birthday, kindled the
fire in a flimsy tin pail, lined with broken bricks. He cracked over
his knee a few pieces of driftwood, mixed the fragments with bits of
coal which he shook out of a sheepskin bottle, doused oil over the
whole, and cheerfully applied the match, while the commercial
traveller hastily drew up a bucket of water to have on hand for
emergencies. Then the boy, with excellent intentions in the way of
neatness, whisked his blackened hands across the rough end of a rope
and plunged them into the pot of _garbanzos_, to which he added beans,
cabbage, remnants of fried fish, and other sundries at his young
discretion. And while the mess was simmering, he squatted down on the
deck, with his grimy little feet in his fists, rocking himself back
and forth to his own wild Malaga songs, and occasionally disengaging
one hand or the other to plunge it into the pot after a tasty morsel.

"Will you eat?" he repeated manfully, reddening under the scrutiny of
stranger eyes.

"Many thanks! May it profit yourself!"

I opened my luncheon, and again we exchanged these fixed phrases of
Spanish etiquette, although after the refusals enjoined by code of
courtesy, the boy was finally induced to relieve me of my more
indigestible goodies.

"Did you ever hear of Columbus?" I asked, as we munched chestnut cakes
together, leaning on the rail.

"No, senora," he replied, with another blush, "I have heard of
nothing. I know little. I am of very small account. I cook and sing. I
am good for nothing more."

And is it to this those arrogant Spanish boasts, which rang like
trumpets up and down the Guadalquivir, have come at last!

We were in the heart of a perfect sapphire day. The river, often
turbulent and unruly, was on this April afternoon, the sailors said,
_buen muchacho_, a good boy. The boat appeared to navigate herself.
The captain nodded on his lofty perch, and the engineer was curled up
in his own tiny hatchway, trying to read a newspaper, which the fresh
breeze blew into horns and balloons. The rough cabin bunks were full
of sleeping forms, and the leather wine-bottles, flung down carelessly
in the stern, had cuddled each to each in cozy shapes, and seemed to
be sleeping, too. The two soldiers, who had been gambling with coppers
over innumerable games of dominos, were listening grimly to the
oratory of the commercial traveller.

"No fighting for me!" this hero was declaiming. "In strenuous times
like these a man ought to cherish his life for the sake of his
country. Spain needs her sons right here at home. It is sweet, as the
poet says, to die for the _patria_, but to live for the _patria_ is,
in my opinion, just as glorious."

"And more comfortable," grunted one of the soldiers, while the other
gave a hitch to those red infantry trousers which look as if they had
been wading in blood, and walked forward to view from the bows the
little white port of Bonanza.

As the boat went no farther, I had to stain my silver route by a
prosaic parenthesis of land. It was some comfort to remember that
Magellan waited here for that expedition from Seville which was the
first to sail around the globe. I think I travelled the three miles
from Bonanza, Good Weather, to San Lucar de Barrameda in Magellan's
own carriage. It was certainly old enough. As I sat on a tipsy chair
in the middle of a rude wagon frame mounted on two shrieking wooden
wheels, and hooded with broken arches of bamboo, from which flapped
shreds of russet oilcloth, I entered into poignant sympathy with
Magellan's ups and downs of hope and fear. The jolting was such a
torture that, to divert my attention, I questioned the driver as to
the uses of this and that appliance in his rickety ark.

"And what are those ropes for, there in the corner?" was my final
query.

"Those are to tie the coffins down when I have a fare for the
cemetery," he replied, cracking his whip over the incredibly lean mule
that was sulkily jerking us along.

"Please let me get out and walk," I entreated. "You may keep the
valise and show me the way to the inn, and I can go quite as fast as
that mule."

"Now, don't!" he begged, with even intenser pathos. "Strangers always
want to walk before they get to the inn, and then the people laugh at
me. I know my carriage isn't very handsome, but it's the only one in
Bonanza. Just do me the favor to keep your seat a little longer."

I had been lurched out of it only a minute before, but I could not
refuse to sacrifice mere bodily ease to the pride of Spanish spirit.

Notwithstanding Don Jose's dark predictions, this was the only trial
of the trip. To realize to the full the honesty, kindliness, and
dignity of the everyday Spaniard, one needs to turn off from the
sight-seer's route. On the beaten tourist track are exorbitant hotels,
greedy guides, cheating merchants, troops of beggars--everywhere "the
itching palm." But here in San Lucar, for instance, where I had to
spend twenty-four hours at a genuine Spanish _fonda_, the proprietor
took no advantage of the facts that I was a foreigner, a woman, and
practically a prisoner in the place until the Saturday afternoon train
went out, but gave me excellent accommodations, most respectful and
considerate treatment, and the lowest hotel bill that I had seen in
Spain.

San Lucar has, in early Spanish literature, a very ill name for
roguery, but, so far as my brief experience went, Boston could not
have been safer and would not have been so genial. I strayed, for
instance, into a modest little shop to buy a cake of soap, which its
owner declined to sell, insisting that I ought to have a choicer
variety than his, and sending his son, a lad of sixteen, to point me
out more fashionable counters. This youth showed me the sights of the
pleasant seashore town, with its tiers of closely grated windows
standing out from the white fronts of the houses, and its sturdy
packhorses and orange-laden donkeys streaming along the rough stone
streets, and when, at the inn door, I hesitatingly offered him a piece
of silver, doffed his cap with smiling ease, and said he did not take
pay for a pleasure.

Once off the regular lines of travel, however, speed is out of the
question. I might have gone from Seville to Cadiz in three hours;
thanks to historic enthusiasms, it took me nearer three days. After
escaping from San Lucar, I had to pass four hours in Jerez, another
whitewashed, palm-planted town, whose famous sherry has made it the
third city in Spain for wealth. The thing to do at Jerez is to visit
the great _bodegas_ and taste the rich white liquors treasured in
those monster casks, which bear all manner of names, from Christ and
His twelve disciples to Napoleon the Great; but mindful, in the light
of Don Jose's admonitions, that the weak feminine estate is "as water
unto wine," I contented myself with seeing the strange storage basin
of the mountain aqueduct--an immense, immaculate cellar, where endless
vistas of low stone arches stretch away in the silent dusk above the
glimmer of a ghostly lake.

The train for Cadiz must needs be two hours late this particular
evening, but my cabman drove me to approved shops for the purchase of
bread and fruit, and then, of his own motion, drew up our modest
equipage in a shady nook opposite the villa of the English consul,
that I might enjoy my Arcadian repast with a secure mind. Jehu
accepted, after due protestations, a share of the viands, and
reciprocated the attention by buying me a glass of water at the
nearest stand, much amused at my continued preference for Jerez water
over Jerez wine.

One of the Jerez wine merchants, German by birth, shared the railway
carriage with me for a while, and after the social wont of Continental
travel fell to discussing the war. "The Spaniards deserved to be
beaten," he declared, "but the Yankees didn't deserve to beat. They
were conceited enough before, heaven knows, and now they expect all
Europe to black their shoddy shoes. Your own country was a bit to
blame in blocking every effort to keep them in their place."

I felt it time to explain that I was not English, but American. Much
disconcerted, he did his best to make amends.

"I wouldn't have said that for the world if I had known you were an
American--but it's every syllable true."

He thought over this remark in silence for a moment, his Teutonic
spirit sorely strained between kindliness and honesty, and tried
again.

"I would like to say something good about the United States, I would
indeed,--if there was anything to say."

It seemed to occur to him, after a little, that even this apology left
something to be desired, and he brightened up.

"Wouldn't you like some roses? They sell them here at this station.
There comes a boy now with a nice, big bunch. One _peseta_! I think
that's too dear, don't you?"

I hastened to assent.

"The lady says that's too dear. Seventy-five _centimos_? No. The lady
can't pay that. Sixty _centimos_? No. The lady can't afford sixty
_centimos_. Fifty _centimos_? No. The lady says fifty _centimos_ is
too much. She will take them at forty _centimos_. Here's a half
_peseta_. And you must give me back a fat dog."

The boy held back the penny and tried to substitute a cent.

"Oh, sir, please, sir, forty-five _centimos_! There are two dozen
roses here, and all fresh as the dawn. Give me the puppy-dog over."

But the German, who knew how to put even a sharper edge on the
inveterate Spanish bargaining, secured for the value of eight cents,
instead of twenty, his great bouquet of really beautiful roses, and
presented it with as much of a bow as the carriage limits permitted.

"I meant to pay all the time, you know; but one can always make a
better trade, in Spain, if it is done in the name of a lady." And he
added, with that sudden tact which innate goodness and delicacy give
to the most blundering of us mortals, "If you don't like to take them
from a stranger for yourself, you will take them as my peace-offering
to your country."

I was reminded again of my native land by another fellow-traveller--a
Spaniard of the Spaniards, this time, one of the Conservative and
Catholic leaders, greeted at the various stations by priests and monks
and friars, whose hands he solemnly kissed. This distinguished
personage was absorbed in a voluminous type-written manuscript, from
which he occasionally read aloud to the band of political confidants
who accompanied him. It was an arraignment of the Liberal Party, and,
by way of exposing the errors of the Sagasta government, included a
merciless resume of the Spanish naval and military disasters, with
elaborate comparisons of the American and Spanish equipments. He was
then on his way to join in a consoling pilgrimage to a certain image
of Christ, which had been cudgelled by a grief-maddened priest whose
dying mother the image had failed to heal.

These surroundings more or less jostled my sixteenth-century dream,
but I held to it so stubbornly that, when pyramids of salt began to
glimmer like ghosts along the way, and a sweeping curve of lights
warned me of our approach to Cadiz, I made a point of seeing as little
as possible. It was midnight, but Spanish hours are luckily so late
that Don Jose's friends were still at the height of evening
sociability and regaled me with alternate showers of sweetmeats and
questions. Finally, after many exclamations of horror at the audacity
of the trip, all the feminine hospitality of the household lighted me
to a chamber whose walls were hung with pictures of martyrs and
agonizing saints. Among these I counted five colored representations
of Christ opening his breast to display the bleeding heart.

The next morning I promptly took boat to _Puerto de Santa Maria_,
embarked on the return steamer, and so at last found myself once more
on the Silver Road, entering Cadiz harbor from the sea.

To be sure, the _Montserrat_ was riding proudly in my view, although
the warships to which she had been used to curtsy in the open roads of
Cadiz would never cut those shining waves again. The waters were as
turquoise blue as if they had just come from the brush of an old
master, and the towered city rose before us like a crystal castle in
the air. Its limited space, built as it is within great sea walls on
an outlying rock, which only a rope of sand moors to the mainland, has
necessitated narrow streets and high houses, whose _miradores_,
lookouts that everywhere crown the terraced roofs, give this
battlemented aspect to the town. One of the most ancient and tragic
cities known to time, claiming Hercules for its founder, in turn
Phoenician, Carthaginian, Roman, Gothic, Moorish, Spanish, it yet
looks fresh as a water-lily. I could have spent another three days in
gazing. And this sparkling vision was Spain's _Copa de Plata_, the
Silver Cup which has brimmed with the gold and pearls of America, with
blood and flame and glory. Its riches have taken to themselves wings,
but its high, free spirit and frank gayety abide. Still the
Andalusians sing:--

     "_Viva_ Cadiz, Silver Cadiz,
       Whose walls defy the sea,
     Cadiz of the pretty girls,
       Of courtesy and glee!

     "Good luck to merry Cadiz,
       As white as ocean spray,
     And her five and twenty cannon
       That point Gibraltar way!"

But I am bound to add that the cannon do not look dangerous.

CHAPTER XVII. THE IMMEMORIAL FASHION

May all these rest in peace, and all who mourn for them be comforted!
Yet thought drifts away to the poor and lowly, whose grief cannot find
solace in procuring this costly intercession of the Church for the
souls they love. It seems hard that the inequalities of life should
thus reach out into death and purgatory. We used, during our sojourn
in Granada, to meet many pathetic little processions on "The Way of
the Dead." Over this hollow road, almost a ravine, the fortress walls,
with their crumbling towers, keep guard on the one side, and the
terraced gardens of the _Generalife_, with their grand old cypresses,
on the other. And here, almost every hour of the day, is climbing a
company of four rough men, carrying on their shoulders a cheap coffin,
which perhaps a husband follows, or a white-haired father, or, hand in
hand, bewildered orphan boys. The road is so steep that often the
bearers set their burden down in the shadow of the bank-side, and
fling themselves at full length on the ground beside it, thriftily
passing from man to man the slow-burning wax match for their paper
cigarettes. I remember more than one such smoking group, with a
solitary mourner, hat in hand and eyes on the coffin, yet he, too,
with cigarette in mouth, standing patiently by. All who pass make the
sign of the cross, and even the rudest peasant uncovers his head. Very
shortly the bearers may be seen again, coming down the hill at a merry
pace, the empty box, with its loose, rattling lid, tilted over the
shoulder now of one, now of another; for the children of poverty, who
had not chambers of their own nor the dignity of solitude in life, lie
huddled in a common pit after death, without coffin-planks to sever
dust from dust.

I remember a similar experience in Cadiz. I had driven out with one of
my Spanish hostesses to the large seaside cemetery, a mile beyond the
gate. This is arranged in nine successive patios, planted with palms
and cypresses. In the niches, seashells play a prominent part. The
little angel images, as gay as ever, with their pink girdles and their
purple wings, may be seen swinging in shells, sleeping in shells, and
balancing on the edge of shells to play their golden flutes. Near by
is an English and German cemetery, with green-turfed mounds and a
profusion of blossoming shrubs and flower beds. Not sure of the
direction, as we were leaving the Catholic enclosure I asked a
bandy-legged, leather-visaged old sexton, who might have been the very
one that dug Ophelia's grave, if the "Protestant cemetery" was at our
right. He laid down his mattock, peered about among the mausolea to
see if we were quite alone, winked prodigiously, and, drawing a bunch
of keys from the folds of his black sash, started briskly down a
by-path and signed to us to follow. He led us through stony passages
out beyond the sanctified ground into a dreary, oblong space, a patch
of weeds and sand, enclosed by the lofty sepulchral walls, but with a
blessed strip of blue sky overhead.

"Here they are!" he chuckled. "They wouldn't confess, they died
without the sacraments, and here they are."

Some names lettered on the wall seemed to be those of Dutch and
Norwegian sailors, who had perhaps died friendless in this foreign
port. There were pebble-strewn graves of Jews, and upright marbles
from which the dead still seemed to utter voice: "I refuse the prayers
of all the saints, and ask the prayers of honest human souls. I
believe in God." And another, "God is knowledge." And another, "God is
All that works for Wisdom and for Love."

"Are there burial services for these?" I inquired.

If the Church of England could have seen that crooked old sexton go
through his gleeful pantomime!

"There's one that comes with some, and they call him Pastor! And he
scrapes up a handful of dirt--so! And he flings it at the coffin--so!
And then he stands up straight and says, 'Dust to dust!' I've heard
him say it myself."

"God of my soul!" cried the Spanish lady in horror, and to express her
detestation of such a heathenish rite, she spat upon the ground.

The monarchs of Spain do not mingle their ashes. Who knows where
Roderick sleeps? Or does that deathless culprit still lurk in mountain
caverns, as tradition has it, wringing his wasted hands and tearing
his white beard in unavailing penitence? The "Catholic kings,"
Ferdinand and Isabella, lie, not where they had planned, in that
beautiful Gothic church of Toledo, _San Juan de los Reyes_, on whose
outer walls yet hang the Moorish chains struck from the limbs of
Christian captives, but in Granada, the city of their conquest, where
they slumber proudly, although their coffins are of plainest lead and
their last royal chamber a small and dusky vault. Pedro the Cruel is
thrust away in a narrow wall-grave beneath the _Capilla Real_ of
Seville cathedral. His brother, the Master of Santiago, whom he
treacherously slew in one of the loveliest halls of the Alcazar, is
packed closely in on his left, and Maria de Padilla, for whose sake he
cut short the hapless life of Queen Blanche, on his right. Pleasant
family discussions they must have at the witching hour of night, when
they drag their numb bones out of those pigeon-holes for a brief
respite of elbow room! San Fernando, the Castilian conqueror of
Castile, canonized "because he carried fagots with his own hands for
the burning of heretics," is more commodiously accommodated in a
silver sarcophagus in the chapel above, where Alfonso the Learned also
has long leisure for thought. Another Alfonso and another Fernando,
with another wife of Pedro the Cruel, keep their state in Santiago de
Compostela, and still another Alfonso and two Sanchos have their
splendid tombs in the _Capilla Mayor_ of Toledo cathedral, while in
its _Capilla de los Reyes Nuevos_, a line descended from that brother
whom Pedro murdered, sleeps the first John, with the second and third
Henrys.

Cordova cathedral, although this lovely mosque recks little of
Christian majesties, has the ordinary equipment of an Alfonso and a
Fernando, and the Royal Monastery of Las Huelgas in Burgos shelters
Alfonso VIII, with his queen, Eleanor of England. In less noted
churches, one continually chances on them, _rey_ or _reina_, _infante_
or _infanta_, dreaming the centuries away in rich recesses of fretted
marble and alabaster, with the shadow of great arches over them and
the deep-voiced chant around.

CHAPTER XVIII. CORPUS CHRISTI IN TOLEDO

There are a few cities in Spain, however, where the Corpus fete is
maintained with something of the old gayety and splendor. Bustling
Barcelona, never too busy for a frolic, keeps it merrily with an
elaborate parade from the cathedral all about the city,
and--delightful feature!--the distribution of flowers and sweetmeats
among the ladies. The procession in Valencia resembles those of Holy
Week in Seville. On litters strewn with flowers and thick-set with
candle-lights are borne carved groups of sacred figures and richly
attired images of Christ and the Virgin. But it is in lyric Andalusia
that these pageantries are most at home. Among her popular _coplas_ is
one that runs:--

     "Thursdays three in the year there be,
       That shine more bright than the sun's own ray--
     Holy Thursday, Corpus Christi,
       And our Lord's Ascension Day."

Cadiz, like Valencia, carries the _pasos_ in the Corpus procession. In
Seville, where the street displays of Holy Week are under the charge
of the religious brotherhoods, or _cofradias_, Corpus Christi gives
opportunity for the clergy and aristocracy to present a rival
exhibition of sanctified luxury and magnificence.

But it is in beautiful belated Granada that the Corpus fete is now at
its best. A brilliantly illustrated programme, whose many-hued cover
significantly groups a gamboge cathedral very much in the background,
and a flower-crowned Andalusian maiden, draped in a Manila shawl, with
a prodigious guitar at her feet, very much in the foreground,
announces a medley of festivities extending over eleven days. This
cheerful booklet promises, together with a constant supply of military
music, balcony decorations, and city illuminations, an assortment of
pleasures warranted to suit every taste--infantry reviews, cavalry
reviews, cadet reviews, masses under roof and masses in the open,
claustral processions, parades of giants, dwarfs, and _La Tarasca_, a
charity raffle in the park under the patronage of Granada's most
distinguished ladies, the erection of out-of-door altars, the
dispensing of six thousand loaves of bread among the poor (from my
experience of Granada beggars I should say the supply was
insufficient), a solemn Corpus procession passing along white-canopied
streets under a rain of flowers, three regular bull-fights with the
grand masters Guerrita, Lagartijillo, and Fuentes, followed by a
gloriously brutal _corrida_, with young beasts and inexperienced
fighters, cattle fair, booths, puppet shows, climbing of greased
poles, exhibition of fine arts and industries, horse racing, polo,
pigeon shoot, trapeze, balloon ascensions, gypsy dances, and fireworks
galore.

But even faithful Granada shared in the strange catalogue of
misfortunes which attended Corpus last year. The rains descended on
her Chinese lanterns, and the winds beat against her Arabic arches
with their thousands of gas-lights. On the sacred Thursday itself, the
Andalusian weather made a most unusual demonstration of hurricane and
cloudburst, with interludes of thunder and lightning. Great was the
damage in field, vineyard, and orchard, and as for processions, they
were in many places out of the question. Even Seville and Cordova had
to postpone both parades and bull-fights. But this was not the worst.
In Ecija, one of the quaintest cities of Andalusia, an image of the
Virgin as the Divine Shepherdess, lovingly arrayed and adorned with no
little outlay by the nuns of the Conception, caught fire in the
procession from a taper, like Seville's Virgin of Montserrat in the
last _Semana Santa_. The _Divina Pastora_ barely escaped with her
jewels. Her elaborate garments, the herbage and foliage of her
pasture, and one of her woolly sheep were burned to ashes. In Palma de
Mallorca, a romantic town of the Balearic Isles, a balcony, whose
occupants were leaning out to watch the procession, broke away, and
crashed down into the midst of the throng. A young girl fell upon the
bayonet of a soldier marching beneath, and was grievously hurt. Others
suffered wounds which, in one case at least, proved fatal. The
Opposition journals did not fail to make capital out of these untoward
events, serving them up in satiric verse with the irreverent
suggestion that, if this was all the favor a reactionary and
ultra-Catholic government could secure from Heaven, it was time to go
back to Sagasta.

Chapter XX. CHORAL GAMES OF SPANISH CHILDREN

On one of my last afternoons in Madrid, I visited again my early
haunts in the _Buen Retiro_, for a farewell sight of the children
there at play. After all, it is one of the prettiest things to be seen
in Spain, these graceful, passionate, dramatic little creatures
dancing in tireless circles, and piping those songs that every _nina_
knows, without being able to tell when or where or from whom she
learned them. Only very small boys, as a rule, join the girls in these
fairy rings, though occasionally I found a troop of urchins marching
to a lusty chorus of their own. One, which I heard in Madrid, but
whose parrots are more suggestive of Seville, runs something like
this:--

     "In the street they call Toledo
         Is a famous school for boys,
     Chundarata, chundarata,
         Chundarata, chun-chun;
     Where all we lads are going
         With a most heroic noise,
     Chundarata, chundarata,
         Chundarata, chun-chun.

     "And the parrots on their perches,
         They mock us as we go,
     Chundarata, chundarata,
         Chundarata, chun-chun.
     'I hate my school,' whines Polly,
         'For my master beats me so,'
     Chundarata, chundarata,
         Chundarata, chun-chun."

Another, which came to me in fragments, is sung in playing soldier.

     "The Catalans are coming,
       Marching two by two.
     All who hear the drumming
       Tiptoe for a view.
           Ay, ay!
       Tiptoe for a view.
     Red and yellow banners,
         Pennies very few.
           Ay, ay!
         Pennies very few.

     "Red and yellow banners!
       The Moon comes out to see.
     If moons had better manners,
       She'd take me on her knee.
           Ay, ay!
       Take me on her knee.
     She peeps through purple shutters,
       Would I were tall as she!
           Ay, ay!
       Would I were tall as she!

     "Soldiers need not learn letters,
       Nor any schooly thing,
     But unless they mind their betters,
       In golden chains they'll swing.
           Ay, ay!
       In golden chains they'll swing.
     Or sit in silver fetters,
       Presents from the King.
           Ay, ay!
       Presents from the King."

Another lyric dialogue, whose fun is spent on the lean purses of
students and the happy-go-lucky life of Andalusia, must have
originated since the overthrow, in 1892, of the leaning tower of
Saragossa. The stanzas are sung alternately by two rows of children,
advancing toward each other and retreating with a dancing step.

     1.  "In Saragossa
         --Oh, what a pity!--
         Has fallen the tower,
         Pride of the city.

     2.  "Fell it by tempest,
         Fairies or witches,
         The students will raise it,
         For students have riches.

     1.  "Call on the students,
         Call louder and louder!
         They've only two coppers
         To buy them a chowder.

     2.  "Chowder of students
         Is sweeter than honey,
         But the gay Andalusians
         Have plenty of money.

     1.  "The gay Andalusians
         Have fiddle and ballad,
         But only two coppers
         To buy them a salad.

     "When she goes out walking in her Manila shawl,
     My Andalusian dolly is quite the queen of all.
     Gypsies, dukes, and candy-men bow down in a row,
     While my dolly fans herself so and so and so.
                                [_Fans Dolly in time to the music._

     "2 and 2 are 4, 4 and 2 are 6,
     6 and 2 are 8, and 8 is 16,
     And 8 is 24, and 8 is 24!
       Twenty-four! Twenty-four!
     Blessed souls, I rise once more."
Equally pretty and simple is the Andalusian play of "Little White
Pigeons." The children form in two rows, which face each other some
ten or twelve yards apart. One row sings the first stanza, dancing
forward and slipping under the "golden arches" made by the lifted arms
of the second row. The second row sings and dances in turn, passing
under the "silver arches" to Granada.

     1.  "Little white pigeons
           Are dreaming of Seville,
         Sun in the palm tree,
           Roses and revel.
         Lift up the arches,
           Gold as the weather.
         Little white pigeons
           Come flying together.

     2.  "Little white pigeons
           Dream of Granada,
         Glistening snows on
           Sierra Nevada.
         Lift up the arches,
           Silver as fountains.
         Little white pigeons
           Fly to the mountains."

In religious Seville the dialogue runs:--

     "'A candle here?'
       'Over there.'
     'A candle here?'
       'Otherwhere.'

     "'Candle, a candle!'
       'Loss on loss.'
     'Where is light?'
       'In the Holy Cross.'"


Spanish forfeit games are numerous and ingenious. In one of these,
called "The Toilet," the players take the names of Mirror, Brush,
Comb, Towel, Soap, and other essentials, including Jesus, Devil, and
Man Alive, these last for exclamatory purposes. As each is mentioned
by the leader of the game, he must rise instantly, on pain of forfeit,
no matter how fast the speaker may be rattling on: "_Jesus!_ When will
that _devil_ of a _maid_ bring me my _powder_ and _perfumes_?"
Characteristic titles of other forfeit games are, "The Key of Rome,"
"The Fan," "The Fountain," "I Saw my Love Last Night." The sentences
vary from such gentle penalties as "The Caress of Cadiz" to the
predicament of putting three feet on the wall at once.

Mambru himself is the pathetic hero of Spanish childhood. This Mambru
for whom the little ones from Aragon to Andalusia pipe so many simple
elegies, the Mambru sung by Trilby, is not the English Marlborough to
them, but, be he lord or peasant, one of their very own.
     
A game that I often watched blithe young Granadines playing under the
gray shadow of Alhambra walls, seems to be a Spanish version of
"London Bridge is Falling Down." Two children are chosen to be Rose
and Pink. These form an arch with their uplifted arms, through which
run the other children in a line, headed by the Mother. A musical
dialogue is maintained throughout.

With the legend of St. Katharine and her martyrdom childish fancy has
played queer caprices.

     "In Cadiz was a wean--ah!
     The gentlest ever seen--ah!
     Her name was Catalina.
           Ay, so!
     Her name was Catalina.


Chapter XXI.  "O LA SENORITA!"

     "Since the English education came into fashion, there is not a
     maiden left who can feel true love."--ALARCON.

During my stifling night journey from Madrid to the north I had much
chat with Castilian and German ladies in the carriage about Spanish
girls. Our talk turned especially on their reading, so reminding me of
an incident of the past spring. On an Andalusian balcony I once found
a little girl curled up in the coolest corner and poring over a
shabby, paper-bound book. On my expressing interest in the volume, she
presented it at once, according to the code of Spanish manners. "The
book is at the disposal of your worship." But as the bundle of
tattered leaves was not only so precious to her own small worship, but
also greatly in demand among her worshipful young mates, whose
constant borrowing seemed a strain even on Andalusian courtesy, I
retained it merely long enough to note the title and general
character. The next time I entered a book-shop I expended ten cents
for this specimen of juvenile literature--"the best-selling book in
Seville," if the clerk's word may be taken--and have it before me as I
write. On the cover is stamped a picture of two graceful senoritas,
perusing, apparently, this very work, "The Book of the Enamored and
the Secretary of Lovers," and throughout the two hundred pages are
scattered cheap cuts, never indecent, but suggesting violent ardors of
passion--embracings, kissings, gazings, pleadings, with hearts,
arrows, torches, and other ancient and honorable heraldry of Cupid.
The title-page announces that this is a fifth edition of ten thousand
copies.


The Spanish girl is every whit as fascinating as her musical, cloaked
gallant confides to her iron-grated lattice. Indeed, these amorous
serenades hardly do her justice, blending as she does French animation
with Italian fervor. In Andalusia she dances with a grace that makes
every other use of life seem vain. And when she bargains, there is
nothing sordid about it. Her haggling is a social condescension that
at once puts the black-eyed young salesman at her mercy.

"But the fan seems to me the least bit dear, senor."

He shrugs his shoulders and flings out his arm in protest.

"Ah, senorita! You see not how beautiful the work is. I am giving it
away at six _pesetas_."

She lifts her eyebrows half incredulously, all bewitchingly.

"At five _pesetas_, senor."

He runs his hand through his black hair in chivalrous distress.

"But the peerless work, senorita! And this other, too! I sacrifice it
at four _pesetas_."

She touches both fans lightly.

"You will let us have the two at seven _pesetas_, senor?"

Her eyes dance over his confusion. He catches the gleam, laughs back,
throws up his hands.

"_Bueno_, senorita. At what you please."

It takes a Spaniard to depict a throng of Spanish ladies,--"fiery
carnations or starry jasmine in their hair, cheeks like blush roses,
eyes black or blue, with lashes quivering like butterflies; cherry
lips, a glance as fickle as the light nod of a flower in the wind, and
smiles that reveal teeth like pearls; the all-pervading fan with its
wordless telegraphy in a thousand colors." In such a throng one sees
not only the typical "eyes of midnight," but those "emerald eyes"
which Cervantes knew, and veritable pansy-colored eyes dancing with
more than pansy mischief. But the voices! In curious contrast to the
tones of Spanish men, soft, coaxing, caressing, the voices of the
women are too often high and harsh, suggesting, in moments of
excitement, the scream of the Andalusian parrot. "O Jesus, what a
fetching hat! The feather, the feather, see, see, see, _see_ the
feather! Mary Most Pure, but it must have cost four or five _pesetas_!
Ah, my God, don't I wish it were mine!" The speaker who gets the lead
in a chattering knot of Spanish women is a prodigy not only of
volubility, but of general muscular action. She keeps time to her
shrill music with hands, fan, elbows, shoulders, eyebrows, knees. She
dashes her sentences with inarticulate whirs and whistles, and
countless pious interjections: _Gracias a Dios! Santa Maria! O Dios
mio!_ The others, out-screamed and out-gesticulated, clutch at her,
shriek at her, fly at her, and still, by some mysterious genius,
maintain courtesy, grace, and dignity through it all. Yet it is true
that the vulgar-rich variety is especially obnoxious among Spaniards.
An overdressed Spanish woman is frightfully overdressed, her voice is
maddening, her gusts of mirth and anger are painfully uncontrolled.
This, however, is the exception, and refinement the rule.

The legendary Spanish lady is forever sitting at a barred window, or
leaning from a balcony, coquetting with a fan and dropping arch
responses to the "caramel phrases" of her guitar-tinkling cavalier.

I came but slightly in contact with Spanish nuns. Among the figures
that stand out clear in memory are a kindly old sister, at Seville, in
the _Hospital de la Caridad_, who paused midway in her exhibition of
the famous Murillos there to wipe her eyes and grieve that we were
Protestants, and an austere, beautiful woman in _La Cuna_, or
Foundling Asylum of Seville, who caressed a crying baby with the
passionate tenderness of motherhood denied. The merriest Spanish
_hermana_ of our acquaintance we encountered on the French side of the
Pyrenees. At Anglet, halfway between Biarritz and Bayonne, is the
Convent of the Bernardines, Silent Sisters. The visitor sees them only
from a distance, robed in white flannel, with large white crosses
gleaming on the back of their hooded capes. These, too, were
originally white, and the hoods so deep that not even the profile of
the features could be seen; but the French Government, disturbed by
the excessive death-rate in this order, recently had the audacity to
interfere and give summary orders that the hoods be cut away, so that
the healthful sunshine might visit those pale faces. The mandate was
obeyed, but, perhaps in sign of mournful protest, the new hoods and
capes are black as night. These women Trappists may recite their
prayers aloud, as they work in field or garden, or over their
embroidery frames, but they speak for human hearing only once a year,
when their closest family friends may visit them and listen through a
grating to what their disused voices may yet be able to utter. From
all other contact with the world they are shielded by an outpost guard
of a few of the Servants of Mary, an industrious, self-supporting
sisterhood, whose own convent, half a mile away, is a refuge for
unwedded mothers and a home for unfathered children. Hither the
pitying sisters brought, a few days before our visit, a wild-eyed girl
whom they had found lying on one of the sea rocks, waiting for the
rising tide to cover her and her shame together. The chief treasure of
this nunnery, one regrets to add, is the polished skull of Mary
Magdalene.

To the spinster outside the nunnery Spain has little to offer. Small
heed is paid to her except by St. Elias, who, on one day of Holy Week,
walks about all Seville with a pen in his hand, peering up at the
balconies and making note of the old maids. Since Andalusia expresses
the theory of counterparts by saying, "Every one has somewhere in the
world his half orange," the spinster can hardly hope for a
well-rounded life. Careers are not open to her. There are "advanced
women" in Spain, the most eminent being Emelia Pardo Bazan, novelist,
lecturer, editor, who advocates for women equal educational and
political privileges with men, but who has not yet succeeded in
opening the doors. The voice of Spanish women, nevertheless, is
sometimes heard by Spanish statesmen, as when delegation after
delegation of senoras who had relatives held as prisoners by the
Filipinos invaded the senate-house with petitions until they could no
longer be ignored.

A more thorough and liberal education for Spanish women is the
pressing need to-day. There is, of course, great lack of primary
schooling. A girl in her late teens, wearing the prettiest of
embroidered aprons and with the reddest of roses in her hair, once
appealed to me in Toledo for help. She had been sent from a
confectioner's to deliver a tray of wheaten rolls at a given address,
and she could read neither the names of streets nor the numbers of
houses. But the higher education will carry the lower with it. Spain
is degenerate in this regard. The Moors used to have at Cordova an
academy for girls, where science, mathematics, and history were
taught. Schools for Spanish girls at present impart little more than
reading and writing, needle-work, the catechism, the four rules of
arithmetic, and some slight notion of geography. French and music,
recognized accomplishments, are learned by daughters of the privileged
class from their governesses or in the convents. Missionary work in
Spain has largely concerned itself with the educational question, and
Mrs. Gulick's project for the establishment of a woman's college in
Madrid, a college without distinction of creed, is the fruit of long
experience. Little by little she has proven the intellectual ability
of Spanish girls. She established the International Institute at San
Sebastian, secured State examination for her _ninas_ and State
recognition of their eminent success, and even won for a few of them
admission to the University of Madrid, where they maintained the
highest rank throughout the course. All that Spanish girls need is
opportunity.

Chapter. XXIII IN OLD CASTILE

     "With three thousand men of Leon from the city Bernard goes,
     To protect the soil Hispanian from the spear of Frankish foes;
     From the city which is planted in the midst between the seas,
     To preserve the name and glory of old Pelayo's victories.

     "The peasant hears upon his field the trumpet of the knight,--
     He quits his team for spear and shield and garniture of might;
     The shepherd hears it 'mid the mist,--he flingeth down his crook,
     And rushes from the mountain like a tempest-troubled brook."
                                       --LOCKHART: _Spanish Ballads_.


The journey from Bilbao to Santander is a continuous glory of mountain
views. The train runs saucily along under beetling crags, whence the
gods of the hills may well look down in wonder and displeasure on this
noisy invasion of their solitude. We almost saw those ancient
majesties folding themselves grandly in mantles of purple shadow, but
hardly less royal in bearing were the muffled figures of the lonely
shepherds tending their flocks on the very summits.

The modern Province of Santander is the renowned Montana, the mountain
lair which nourished the chivalry of Old Castile, and from which they
made wild sallies to the south, troop after troop, generation after
generation, until the Moorish standards were beaten back from the
plains about Toledo to the Sierras of Andalusia. Its capital city,
Santander, named from St. Andrew, was one of the four coast towns
which rendered signal service to Fernando in the conquest of Seville.
These towns, lying as they did over against the Cinque Ports of
England, came into so frequent conflict with British mariners as to be
made in the days of Edward III the subject of a special treaty.


When the chant had died away, an affectionate old sacristan, in a
curious red and black coat, delivered us with sundry farewell pats and
pinches over to the charge of a subordinate, who proceeded to display
the hidden treasures. These are far from overwhelming, after the
glittering hoards of Burgos, Seville, and Toledo, but they are as odd
an assortment as sacristy ever sheltered. There was an absurd portrait
of Charles I, a freak of foreshortening. At first sight it seemed to
be the skeleton of a fish, but on viewing it through a peephole the
creature had become a human face. Even so, it was hardly a flattering
likeness of the founder of the Austrian line; but as it was Charles I
who stripped Palencia of her original powers and dignities, one would
not expect to find him complimented here.

Chapter XXIV. PILGRIMS OF SAINT JAMES


This conveyance was a species of narrow omnibus, which an Andalusian,
an Englishman, a son of Compostela returning home after a long sojourn
in foreign parts, his young wife of Jewish features, and our weary
selves filled to overflowing. Our Jehu had agreed to transport the six
of us, with our effects, for the sum of sixteen dollars; but deep was
our disgust when he piled our handbags, shawl straps, and all our
lesser properties in upon our wedged and helpless forms, and crammed
six rough Gallegos, with a reeling load of trunks and boxes, on the
roof. Remonstrance would be futile. The places in the regular
diligence were not only taken for the afternoon but engaged for
several days ahead, and carriages are rare birds in Galicia. The
Spanish gentlemen merely shrugged their shoulders, the Englishman had
but that morning landed in Spain and could not speak a word of the
vernacular, and feminine protest was clearly out of order. The four
puny horses took the top-heavy vehicle at a rattling pace down the
granite-paved streets of Coruna, but hardly were we under way when our
griefs began.


XXV

The corner-stone of the strange history is priestly legend. The
Apostle James the Greater, so runs the tale, after preaching in
Damascus and along the Mediterranean coast, came in a Greek ship to
Galicia, then under Roman rule, and proclaimed the gospel in its
capital city, Iria-Flavia. Here the Virgin appeared to him, veiled,
like the mother of AEneas, in a cloud, and bade him build a church.
This he did, putting a bishop in charge, and then pursued his mission,
not only in the remote parts of Galicia, but in Aragon, Castile, and
Andalusia. At Saragossa the Virgin again flashed upon his sight. She
was poised, this time, on a marble pillar, which she left behind her
to become, what it is to-day, the most sacred object in all Spain. A
chip of this _columna immobilis_ is one of the treasures of Toledo.
The cathedral of the _Virgen del Pilar_,--affectionately known as
Pilarica,--which James then founded at Saragossa, is still a popular
goal of pilgrimage, the marble of the holy column being hollowed, at
one unshielded spot, by countless millions of kisses. 

Now began grand doings in Iria, known henceforth as the Field of the
Star, _Campus Stellae_, or Compostela. Alfonso had a church of stone
and clay built above the sepulchre, and endowed it with an estate of
three square miles. The Pope announced the discovery to Christendom. A
community of twelve monks, with a presiding abbot, was installed at
Compostela to say masses before the shrine. For these beginnings of
homage the Apostle made a munificent return. A wild people, living in
a wild land at a wild time, these Spaniards of the Middle Ages were
shaped and swayed by two sovereign impulses, piety and patriotism.
These two were practically one, for patriotism meant the expulsion of
the Moor, and piety, Cross above Koran. It was a life-and-death
struggle. The dispossessed Christians, beaten back from Andalusia and
Castile to the fastnesses of the northern mountains, were fighting
against fearful odds. They felt sore need of a leader, for although,
when their ranks were wavering, the Virgin had sometimes appeared to
cheer them on, hers, after all, was but a woman's arm. It was in the
battle of Clavijo, 846, that Santiago first flashed into view, an
invincible champion of the cross.

Rameiro, successor to Alfonso II, had taken the field against the
terrible Abderrahman of Cordova, who had already overrun Valencia and
Barcelona and was demanding from Galicia a yearly tribute of one
hundred maidens. This exceedingly Moorish tax, which now amuses Madrid
as a rattling farce in the summer theatre of the _Buen Retiro_, was no
jesting matter then. Not only the most famous warriors of the realm,
Bernardo del Carpio in their van, but shepherds and ploughmen,
priests, monks, even bishops, flocked to the royal standard.

Even in the ninth century such multitudes visited the sepulchre that a
society of hidalgos was formed to guard the pilgrims from bandits
along that savage route, serve them as money-changers in Compostela,
and in all possible ways protect them from robbery and ill-usage. This
brotherhood gave birth to the famous Order of Santiago, whose two vows
were to defend the pilgrims and fight the Mussulmans. These red-cross
knights were as devout as they were valiant, "lambs at the sound of
the church-bells and lions at the call of the trumpet." Kings and
popes gave liberally to aid their work. Roads were cut through Spain
and France, even Italy and Germany, "to Santiago." Forests were
cleared, morasses drained, bridges built, and rest-houses instituted,
as San Marcos at Leon and the celebrated hostelry of Roncesvalles.
Compostela had become a populous city, but a city of inns, hospitals,
and all variety of conventual and religious establishments. Even
to-day it can count nearly three hundred altars. In the ninth century
the modest church of Alfonso II was replaced by an ornate edifice rich
in treasures, but in the gloomy tenth century, when Christian energies
were arrested by the dread expectation of the end of the world, the
Moors overran Galicia and laid the holy city waste. The Moslem
general, Almanzor, had meant to shatter the urn of Santiago, but when
he entered Compostela with his triumphant troops, he found only one
defender there, an aged monk sitting silent on the Apostle's tomb. The
magnanimous Moor did not molest him, nor the ashes his feebleness
guarded better than strength, but took abundant booty. When Almanzor
marched to the south again, four thousand Galician captives bore on
their shoulders the treasures of the Apostle, even the church-bells
and sculptured doors, to adorn the mosque of Cordova. The fresh
courage of the eleventh century began the great Romanesque cathedral
of Santiago. Donations poured in from all over Europe. Pilgrims came
bowed under the weight of marble and granite blocks for the fabric.
Young and old, men and women, beggars and peasants, princes and
prelates, had a hand in the building, cutting short their prayers to
mix mortar and hew stone. Artists from far-off lands, who had come on
pilgrimage, lingered for years, often for lifetimes, in Compostela,
making beautiful the dwelling of the saint.


The finished cathedral was consecrated in 1211, and in 1236 the royal
saint, Fernando III, sent to Compostela a train of Mohammedan
captives, bringing back on their shoulders the bells Almanzor had
taken. These had been hung, inverted, in the beautiful mosque of
Cordova to serve as lamps for the infidel worship, but at last St.
James had his own again. Thus Santiago trampled on the Moors, and his
ashes, or what had passed for his ashes, slept in peace, with nothing
to do but work miracles on blind and crippled pilgrims, until, in
1589, an army of English heretics, led by the horrible Drake, landed
in Galicia. These Lutheran dogs were not worthy of a miracle. 

Chapter XXVI. THE SON OF THUNDER
Soon it is lustrous white and then, in perishing,
sends up a swift succession of giant rockets. The facade itself is a
very Alhambra of fret and arabesque. This, too, with thunder bursts
reveals itself as a flame-colored, sky-colored, sea-colored miracle,
which pales to gleaming silver and, while we read above it the
resplendent words "The Patron of Spain," is blown to atoms as a symbol
of Santiago's victory over the Moors. This makes an ideal Spanish
holiday, but the cost, borne by the city, is heavy, there is distinct
and increasing injury to the cathedral fabric, and all this jubilee
for archaic victories over the Moslem seems to be mocked by the hard
facts of to-day.


Yet Spain is far from unhappy. It is beautiful to see out of what
scant allowance of that which we call well-being, may be evolved
wisdom and joy, poetry and religion. Wearied as we two bookish
travellers were with lectures and libraries, we rejoiced in this wild
Galician lore that lives on the lips of the people. The written
Spanish literature, like other Spanish arts, is of the richest, nor
are its laurels limited to the dates of Cervantes and Calderon. The
modern Spanish novel, for instance, as Mr. Howells so generously
insists, all but leads the line. But Spain herself is poetry. What
does one want of books in presence of her storied, haunted
vistas,--warrior-trod Asturian crags, opalescent reaches of Castilian
plain, orange-scented gardens of Andalusia? A circle of cultivated
Spaniards is one of the most charming groups on earth, but Spaniards
altogether innocent of formal education may be walking anthologies of
old ballads, spicy quatrains, riddles, proverbs, fables, epigrams. The
peasant quotes "Don Quixote" without knowing it; the donkey-boy is as
lyric as Romeo; the devout shepherd tells a legend of the Madonna that
is half the dream of his own lonely days among the hills. Where
Spanish life is most stripped of material prosperity, it seems most to
abound in suggestions of romance. This despised Galicia, the province
of simpletons, is literary in its own way. The hovel has no bookshelf,
but the children's ears drink in the grandmother's croon:--


