CHAPTER    I. Retrospective and Ethnological
The    Peninsula,    we    should    remember
 was    once    upon    a    time    overrun    by    the 
IMoor,  except  a  little  strip  among  the  mountains  of 
the   north,  where    Pelayo,   crouching   in    rocky  fast- 
nesses,   kept    a    slender    following    together.      The 
following  grew  in  number  and  the  spirit  of  adven- 
ture.    Sierras  were  crossed,  passes  threaded,  battle- 
axe  and  broadsword  gripped.     By  slow  degrees  the 
advancing     tide     of    Christianity    wore    down     the 
stubborn  barriers  of  the   infidel.     Inch  by  inch  the 
Moor  was  driven  south,  out  of  what  is  now  Madrid, 
out  of  Toledo,  across  La  Mancha  and  the  deserts 
of  Castile,  from  castle  after  castle  poised  on  beetling 
precipice   and   craggy   height,   up    to    and   over   the 
Sierra   Morena    into    Andalusia,    whereto    he    clung 
precariously  for  centuries,  till   the   fall  of  Granada, 
no   earlier   than   the    end   of   the    fifteenth    century, 
exterminated  him — in  Spain — for  ever. 

For  ever  ?  No.  I\Iuch  of  him  still  survives — 
in  the  cool  courts  of  Granada,  the  mighty  mosque 
of  Cordoba,  the  Giralda  of  Seville ;  in  many  an 
alcazar,  and  bridge,  and  pinnacle,  and  wall,  and 
gateway;  and  even  where  such  material  evidence  is 
not,  his  proud,  and  chivalrous,  and  generous,  and 
jealous  nature,  his  passion  for  the  arts,  and  love,  and 
music,  the  angry  rattle  of  his  scimitar,  or  the  dulcet 
echo  of  his  Arabic,  seem  still  to  haunt  what  was  his 
home  long  years  ago.  If  war  has  any  glory,  her 
grandest  annals  are  the  Christians  and  the  Moors 
in  Spain— Las  Navas  de  Tolosa  and  the  Rio 
Salado;  eight  hundred  years  of  obstinate  crusade, 
of  doughty  combat  on  both  sides,  and  mutual 
esteem — in  so  voluminous  a  roll  few  deeds,  if  any, 
foully  done,  or  flags  of  truce  dishonoured:  the 
battle-shock  of  two  heroic  foes,  the  dusk-com- 
plexioned  and  the  fair,  of  North  and  South,  of 
Europe  and  the  East,  the  false  God  and  the 
True. 
Spain  of  to-day  consists  of  forty-eight  provinces, 
including  the  Canary  Islands.  The  distribution  is 
political  merely,  and  it  is  always  well  to  bear  in 
mind  the  older  kingdoms  (regions,  principalities,  or 
counties,  as  the  case  may  be)  of  Cataluna,  Aragon, 
Andalusia,  Castile  (Old  and  New),  Extremadura, 
Leon,  Navarra,  Vizcaya,  Valencia,  Murcia,  Galicia, 
and  Asturias. 

The  Andalusians  must  not  be  taken  like  a  pill, 
seriously,  or  they  go  to  pieces.  They  live  to  be 
amused,  these  epicureans  of  Iberia.  The  sorry  pro- 
cess we  reluctantly  term  life  and  turn  our  noses  up 
at,  is  for  them  a  pageant  set  with  fairs  and  rouses, 
balls  and  bullfights.  Money  they  dispense  with. 
He  who  in  Andalusia  has  not  the  wherewithal  to 
eat,  lies  stomach  downwards  on  the  highway,  and 
the  sky  and  sunshine  nourish  him  with  slumber : — 

"  Fast  asleep  ?     It  is  no  matter  : 
Enjoy  the  honey-heavy  dew  of  slumber  : 
Thou  hast  no  figures,  nor  no  fantasies 
Which  busy  care  draws  in  the  brains  of  men  : 
Therefore  thou  sleepst  so  sound." 

His  whole  existence  is  a  cycle  of  delicious 
emotions.  Wine,  women,  and  the  guitar ;  women, 
the  guitar,  and  wine  ;  the  guitar,  wine,  and  women — 
with  sleep  for  entr'actes;  so  "slips  his  world  aw^ay" 
— and  work,  and  wealth,  and  politics  go  hang.  Yet 
jealousy   and   revenge   are   none  the  less  agreeable 

to  him  when  his  dormant  frenzies  are  aroused,  and 
once  his  blood  is  up  and  he  sticks  a  knife  into  his 
neighbour,  he  finds  a  joy  in  driving  the  blade  haft- 
deep  into  the  victim's  abdomen,  and  sleeps,  in  jail, 
more  soundly  for  the  recollection  of  his  skill.  If  you 
have  an  eye  for  the  artistic,  and  a  nose  that  can  defy 
the  congregated  smells  of  Christendom,  be  sure  to 
step  inside  an  Andalusian  prison.  Any  warder  will 
show  you  round  for  a  peseta.  Such  perfect  filth. 
Such  perfect  inaction.  Such  perfect  insoiiciance. 
Such  rarely  savage  faces.  You  will  remember  the 
experience  to  your  last  day,  even  though,  unlike  poor 
Borrow,  you  make  the  entrance  in  an  amateurish 
style,  and  as  a  self-incarcerated  visitor. 

Those  of  the  north  tend  to  be 
apathetic,  churlish,  and  sullen,  while  the  coast- 
dwellers  are  more  refined,  sociable,  and  industrious. 
They  speak  Castilian,  with  an  admixture  of  Arabic 
and  Valencian,  and  with  a  slight  lisp  resembling 
that  of  the  Andalusians.  Their  accent  is  far  from 
disagreeable,  especially  that  of  the  women,  who  are 
amiable  and  expressive." 

CHAPTER II. Introspective and Geographical

The  Cordillera  Marianica  springs  from  the  humble 
Sierra  de  Alcaraz,  west  of  Albacete,  swells  into  the 
Sierra  Morena  and  Serrania  de  Cordoba,  and  dwindles 
into  the  Sierras  Guadalcanal  and  Aroche,  terminating 
on  the  southern  coast  at  Ayamonte,  on  the  Portu- 
guese frontier.  But  the  giantry  of  Spanish  peaks  lie 
in  the  Cordillera  Penibetica,  or  southern  group, 
which  traverses  the  Andalusian  provinces  of  Malaga, 
Granada,  and  Cadiz,  and  closes  at  Gibraltar.  It 
includes  the  Sierras  of  Almijara,  Alhama,  Abdalajis, 
Tolox,  Ronda,  Mijas,  and  Bermeja. 

To  one  who  is  familiar  with  the  country  these 
mountains  bear  an  unmistakable  individualism ;  so 
much  so  that  were  he  to  be  conveyed  blindfold  to 
every  quarter  of  the  country  in  turn,  and  the  bandage 
to  be  stripped  at  intervals  from  his  eyes,  the  merest 
glance  would  tell  him  where  he  was,  and  what  Sierra 
he  was  confronting.  "These  russet  peaks,"  he 
would  declare,  "  are  the  Sierra  Bermeja,  or  Red 
Mountains,  that  travel  from  the  sea  to  the  highlands 
of  Ronda.
This  grayish  mass,  with  fantastic  overhanging 
boulders,  and  a  monastery  poised  upon  its  abrupt 
side,  is  the  famous  Monserrat,  where  the  Virgin  of 
the  Black  Face  is  still  adorned  and  worshipped  by 
pious  pilgrims.  Yonder  is  the  aldea  of  Collbato,  a 
placid  hamlet  whose  olive-groves  fringe  the  moun- 
tain, and  not  far  away  from  both  the  silver  Llobre- 
gat,  misnamed  the  red,  runs  sparkling  to  the  sea. 
Here,  yet  again,  is  Monseny,  a  spur  of  the  Catalan 
Pyrenees.  I  recognise  its  saddle  shape,  and  the 
cottages  upon  its  Hank.  And  these,  with  adulating 
hills  about  their  feet,  and  the  eternal  snows  upon 
their  crest,  wrapped  in  their  velvety  robes  of  blue 
and  purple  mist,  or  flushing  carmine  with  the  sun- 
set, are  surely  the  emperors  and  the  autocrats  of 
Spanish  mountaindom — the  Sierra  Nevada  of  the 
glorious  Andalusias." 

The  brushwood 
is  dense  and  lovely,  the  meadows  are  greener  than 
those  of  England,  and  the  houses  along  the  wayside 
are  picturesque  and  venerable — not  spruce  and  white- 
washed like  those  of  Andalusia,  but  of  a  tawny  or 
gray  stone  that  appears  to  have  turned  colour  from 
very  age.  Their  shape  is  not  dissimilar  to  that  of  the 
Swiss  chalets,  and  a  wooden  staircase  commonly  runs 
outside  from  the  basement  to  the  only  storey.  No 
dwellings  I  have  seen  have  looked  so  old  as  these; 
yet  they  have  nothing  of  the  ramshackle  or  tumble- 
down. They  seem  to  have  grown  solidly  and  bodily 
into  the  crests  and  bosoms  of  the  hills,  becoming 
an  inseparable  and  essential  part  of  nature. 

How  different  from  these  deserts  are  the  coasts 
of  Andalusia  "that  edge  the  Mediterranean  flote." 
They  seem  another  continent.  A  boundless  richness 
overspreads  them  all ;  but  more  especially  the 
southern  borders  of  the  provinces  of  Malaga  and 
Cadiz,  and  the  Campo  of  Gibraltar — those  fertile, 
peaceful  plains,  edged  by  the  Serrania  de  Ronda, 
wherefrom,  "if  the  weather  be  fine,  the  eye  of  the 
traveller  roams  over  a  vast  expanse  of  peerless 
Andalusia,  over  tracts  of  mountain,  and  foothill,  and 
valley,  and  deeply  azure  sea,  past  the  cork  woods 
of  Almoraima  to  Algeciras,  the  "green  islet"  of 
old  ;  then  across  the  Bay  of  Gibraltar  to  the  grey 
rock  of  Calpe,  and  over  the  straits,  studded  with 
many  a  sail,  to  bright  Tangier  and  the  shores  of 
Barbary.  It  is  all  like  an  inestimably  lovely 
picture,  that  needed  but  one  cunning  master-stroke 
to  make  it  perfect  as  an  earthly  thing  may 
be,  and  lo,  in  the  radiant,  overcrowning  summer 
sky,  that  stroke  is  made.  It  is  a  prospect  never 
to  forget." 

Between  Jimena  and  Arriate  the  Sierra  breaks 
away  from  the  pastures,  and  rises  to  its  loftiest 
and  grandest.  Through  steep  and  narrow  clefts 
the  interpenetrating  sunlight  strikes  from  the  rocks 
a  living  mass  of  colour,  all  shades  of  red,  and 
grey,  and  blue,  relieved  with  saxifrage  and  lichen ; 
and  the  coldest  and  purest  of  streams  burrows 
its     resistless     passage     through     the     adamantine 
bowels  of  the  mountain.  Its  waters  are  of  the 
palest  emerald  green,  save  where  some  fallen 
boulder  breaks  them  into  foamy  sheets  "  whiter 
than  new  snow  on  a  raven's  back." 

Hereabouts,  where  now  the  train  or  coach 
pursues  its  tranquil  way,  was  once  the  hardest  of 
the  fighting  between  the  Moors  and  the  Christians. 
A  grand  and  fitting  theatre  of  battle !  Through 
these  very  defiles  have  wound  the  armored  hosts 
of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  and  the  turbaned 
squadrons  of  the  heathen : 

"  Their  spirits  wrapt  the  dusky  mountain, 
Their  memory  sparkled  o'er  the  fountain, 
The  meanest  rill,  the  mightiest  river. 
Rolled  mingling  with  their  fame  for  ever." 

Typical,  too,  of  Andalusia  is  a  hacienda  or  fruit 
farm,  such  as  I  visited  not  long  ago.  When  I 
started  to  ride  from  Malaga,  it  was  not  yet  five  of 
a  calm  September  morning,  but  the  sky  was  already 
lit,  and  wreaths  of  smoke  from  many  a  roof  twined 
azure  as  the  heaven,  as  though  ashamed  to  stain  so 
delicate  a  clearness.  The  neighbouring  mountains, 
gold,  olive,  sage,  and  terra  cotta,  specked  with 
white  cottages  like  flakes  of  snow  fallen  by 
some  mischance  in  torrid  autumn,  threw  their 
warm  shadows  one  across  another,  or  stood  apart 
like  sentinels  in  lucent  uniform  :  while  the  pearly 
horizon  of  the  west  was  fringed  with  the  glittering 
facets  of  the  great  Sierra,  floating  so  far  above 
and  beyond  their  foothills  as  not  to  seem  of  earth, 
but  parted  by  unpierceable  space  from  these  to  their 
ethereal  selves. 

The  sun,  "with  broad  and  burning  face,"  rose 
higher  and  higher  above  the  mountain  tops ;  and  now 
came  villagers  to  market,  chattering  in  merry  troops, 
basket  on  arm,  or  contrabandistas  in  single  file  from  the 
hicjhlands  of  Gaucin  and  Castellan  One  and  all 
these  respectable  lawbreakers  saluted  me,  glancing 
at  my  thoroughbred  with  something  akin  to  envy ; 
but  they  let  me  pass,  and  grinned  companionably. 
Time  was  they  would  have  called  to  me  to  stand  and 
deliver ;  but  alack !  the  modern  Spanish  smuggler  is 
a  sad  decadent.  He  mounts,  indeed,  as  strapping 
and  as  sleek  a  beast  as  his  forefathers ;  he  swears 
as  lustily  and  smokes  as  hard ;  but  his  conduct  is 
timorous  and  kind  towards  his  fellow-men,  and 
he  slings  a  Remington  to  his  alforja,  instead  of 
the  bell-mouthed,  business-like  trabuco  of  the  good 
old  days. 
Sang  a  malaguena,  in  the  impassioned  tones  peculiar 
to  these  sons  and  daughters  of  the  r^Ioor.  Thus  sped 
a  pleasant  while,  with  music  and  conversation,  and 
good  cigars  and  better  wine — rich  Malaga,  as  sweet 
as  honey,  or  pale  dry  manzanilla — and  the  supper 
hour  drew  on,  and  the  dusk  began  to  glean  his  last 
thin  sheaves  of  light,  before  we  well  believed  that 
even  the  early  afternoon  was  past. 

The  dream  is  broken.  Such  is  the  life  of  this 
delectable  land  bet^veen  the  mountains  and  the  sea, 
from  the  majestic  Sierras  to  the  cork^s'oods  of 
Almoraima,  where  the  ruddy  bark  is  stripping  from 
the  tree  ;  or  the  level  glebe  below  San Roque,  where 
grain  is  sown  and  harvested,  and  the  buckets  of  the 
noria  go  clattering  round  and  round  to  the  swinging 
tread  of  blindfold  oxen;  this  latter  about  the  Bay 
of  Calpe,  from  the  Sierra  Carbonera,  capped  by  a 
prehistoric  watchtower  known  as  "  The  Queen  of 
Spain's  Chair,"  to  Campamento  and  Linea  de  la 
Concepcion,  or  westward  to  venerable  Algeciras. 
These  were  the  scenes  of  war,  but  spear  and  sword 
are  buried  and  forgotten ;  earth's  many  scars  are 
healed,  and  spade  and  reaping-hook  and  ploughtail 
are  in  hand.  jArre!  jArre! — and  the  careless 
husbandman  goes  peacefully  to  and  fro. 

CHAPTER    III. A    BOURGEOIS    FAMILY    IN    THEIR    DAILY    LIFE. 

Amid  such  small  talk  as  this,  the  basket  is  filled 
and  the  homeward  voyage  begun.  Once  indoors,  the 
cliica  bends  over  the  barreno  in  the  kitchen,  to  wash 
the  linen  ;  the  sehovitas  tidy  and  dust,  and  then  bring 
out  their  embroidery;  and  the  goodwife,  mindful 
of  a  famishing  husband  and  son,  attends  to  the 
pot  already  simmering  on  the  fire.  Here  is  in 
preparation  the  usual  Spanish  comida  or  one  o'clock 
breakfast  —  eggs,  cocido,  and  salad  ;  the  eggs  fried 
in  oil,  pasados  por  agiia  (heated  in  boiling  water 
and  swallowed  almost  raw),  rcvueltos  con  tomatc 
(mashed  with  tomato),  or  en  salsa  (hard-boiled  in 
parsley  sauce).  But  these  may  wait.  It  is  the  coc/t/o 
that  must  be  taken  actively  in  hand — the  undisputed 
aristocrat  and  democrat  at  once  of  Spanish  kitchens. 
Think  of  it :  he  sustains  eighteen  million  souls,  for 
is  there  a  single  Spaniard,  worthy  of  the  name, 
who  does  not  dote  on  him  ?  I  am  positive  that 
Nebuchadnezzar,  when,  in  the  ridiculous  language 
of  the  chronicler.

Perhaps,  like  Oliver 
Goldsmith,  who  wrote  like  an  angel  and  talked  like 
poor  Poll,  but  who  felt  the  necessity  of  certain  articles 
of  attire  as  poignantly  as  any  of  us  humans,  their 
stock  of  linen  is  limited  to  a  single  shirt,  and 
when  that  is  washing  they  stay  indoors.  Their 
allowance  at  best  is  unlikely  to  exceed  twenty 
dollars    a   month   for  washing,    board,   and^  bed ;    in 
which  case,  if  they  are  quick-witted  and  unscru- 
pulous, they  help  to  maintain  themselves  by  sablazos, 
or  sponging  upon  their  wealthier  acquaintances, 
and  are  certain  to  be  in  arrears  with  the  patroiia 
of  their  boarding  house. 

CHAPTER  IV.  MANNERS  AND  CUSTOMS,  OLD  AND  NEW. 

The  delicate  lace  mantilla,  the  most  graceful  head- 
gear in  the  world,  is  either  white  or  black.  As  a 
general  rule,  the  former  is  for  dressy  occasions  and 
the  latter  for  ordinary  wear,  but  both,  unhappily, 
are  tending  to  succumb  —  especially  among  the 
upper  and  upper  middle  classes — in  favour  of  the 
straw,  stuff,  and  feather  abominations  of  Parisian 
origin.  This  is  deplorable,  since  Spanish  ladies, 
despite  their  numerous  and  prominent  attractions, 
rarely  seem  to  look  their  best  in  a  hat.  Andalusia, 
however,  is  less  disposed  than  other  parts  to 
adopt    the     senseless    innovation,     and    in    Seville, 
Malaga,  Cordoba,  and  other  cities  of  that  region 
it  is  still  possible  to  contemplate,  particularly 
upon  the  road  to  the  bull-ring,  many  a  fair 
young  face  whose  glossy  tresses  are  surmounted 
by  the  classical  mantilla,  pinned  and  disposed  in 
exquisitely  elegant  folds,  and  caught  to  the  hair, 
as  well  as  at  the  bosom,  by  a  couple  of  dazzling 
roses  or  carnations. 

The  mantilla  is  as  old  as  Spanish  history,  and  may 
easily  be  traced  throughout  its  successive  changes, 
from  the  aniiculum  of  the  Gothic  domination  to  the 
head-covering  de  medio  ojo  (half-eye)  of  the  Muz- 
arabs,  the  toca  of  the  Middle  Ages,  the  rocadero  of 
the  fifteenth  century,  the  manto  de  hiimo  and  manto  de 
soplillo  of  the  Austrian  dynasty  ;  and  the  rebocino  of 
the  eighteenth  century,  down  to  the  present  slender, 
delicate,  and  captivating  form. 

The  regional  or  local  costumes,  both  male 
and  female,  are  an  interesting  but  complex  study. 
Just  as  the  sugar-loaf  hats  and  short  skirts  of  my 
countrywomen  of  Wales,  they  are  gradually  dis- 
appearing, and  as  a  rule  it  is  on  festive  occasions 
alone  that  they  are  observable  in  any  number. 
	
Time  was  when  the  Andalusian  indulged  in 
tight  breeches  of  a  brilliant  colour,  bound  about  his 
middle  by  equally  as  brilliant  a  sash,  together  with 
leather  polainas  or  gaiters,  open  down  the  calf,  and 
fringed  with  leather  strips — not  unlike  a  mocassin. 
His  waistcoat  was  cut  extremely  low,  fully  display- 
ing a  frilled  shirt ;  over  them  was  a  short,  close-fitting 
velvet  jacket ;  and  the  whole  was  surmounted  by 
the  sombrero  de  queso,  also  called  the  sombrero  calanes, 
or  little  round,  cheese-shaped  hat.  The  same  hat, 
jacket,  waistcoat,  and  frilled  shirt  were  worn  by  the 
Andalusian  woman,  together  with  a  short  skirt,  pre- 
ferably of  a  brilliantly  coloured  silk,  and  over  this  the 
hasqiuha — a  kind  of  overskirt,  shorter  than  the 
other  and  of  black  and  broad-meshed  network. 
Here  is  a  souvenir  of  the  past  which  only  Carmen 
or  the  Barber  of  Seville  recall  to  us.  Nowadays 
the    richly-coloured    shawl    and    the  flowers   in    the 
hair  are  as  characteristic  as  anything  else  of  the 
Andaluza.  The  flowers  display  with  admirable 
contrast  the  glossy  lustre  of  her  hair  ;  and  the  shawl, 
cunningly  draped  and  majestically  carried,  reveals 
at  ever)'  instant  the  symmetry  and  suppleness  of  the 
delicate  outline  it  encloses — 

In  a  certain  Spanish  town,  "  whose  name,"  in  the 
words  of  Cervantes,  "  I  have  no  desire  to  recall,"  I 
made  the  a(?quaintance  of  Herr  Fritz,  a  native,  as 
his  name  implies,  of  Germany,  and  a  traveller  in 
haberdashery — a  convivial  and  excellent  soul,  but 
who  came  to  a  bad  end,  as  you  shall  hear.  Like 
many  Germans  who  travel  in  Spain,  he  was  burn- 
ing to  become  espafwlizado — that  is,  more  deeply 
imbued  with  Spanish  usages  and  characteristics  than 
any  Spaniard.  Week  in,  week  out,  warm  weather  or 
cold,  he  wore  a  capa  and  a  sombrero  de  ala  ancha ; 
discarded  his  native  beer  in  favour  of  manzanilla, 
and  Malaga,  and  aguardiente;  vociferated  '' salud  y 
pesetas,""  instead  of  "  hoch  "  ;  and  strummed  indiffer- 
ently upon  the  guitar. 

 But  the  finishing  touch  of 
his  education  was  still  wanting ;  for  he  had  not  yet 
learned  to  drink  from  a  botijo.  So  one  afternoon, 
proposing  to  remedy  this  shortcoming,  he  bade  the 
servant  of  his  lodging-house  bring  him  the  desired 
vessel,  full  of  water;  and  stripping  to  the  waist, 
eagerly  took  his  station  beside  the  window,  just 
where  the  light  should  fall  conveniently  and  fully 
on  his  exercises.  Now,  to  boldly  tilt  the  botijo  to 
the  necessary  angle  requires  no  little  nerve  and 
resolution,  qualities  in  which,  despite  his  other 
admirable  parts,  the  good  Miiller  was  lacking.  He 
grasped  the  vessel,  hesitated,  threw  back  his  head, 
half  opened  his  mouth,  and  half  lifted  the  botijo. 
The  half  measure  was  his  ruin,  in  spite  of  the  pro- 
verb which  assures  us  that  "  in  medio  tutissimus 
ibis.''     

The   slender  stream  emitted    from  the  small and  narrow  spout,  instead  of  falling  like  a  miniature 
cascade  upon  his  uvula,  tickled  his  palate  acutely. 
He  forgot  to  swallow,  coughed,  tried  to  ejaculate 
the  Teutonic  equivalent  of  our  "  big,  big  D  "  ;  a  few 
but  fatal  drops  "went  down  the  wrong  way,"  and 
abruptly  letting  fall  the  botijo,  which  shivered  into 
pieces  at  his  feet,  drenching  his  socks  and  slippers, 
he  choked  convulsively.  Just  at  that  agonizing 
moment,  while  his  eyes  were  rolling  distractedly  in 
their  orbits,  they  chanced  to  alight  upon  a  window 
of  the  opposite  house. 

Water  in  Spain  is  scarce,  and  yet  how  scarce 
is  drunkenness.  Perhaps  the  crowning  virtue  of  the 
Spaniards  is  their  abstinence  from  alcoholic  liquor. 
In  eight  years  I  cannot  remember  to  have  seen  a 
score  of  really  drunken  Spaniards  ;  and  in  saying  this 
I  am  aware  that  I  am  saying  a  great  deal,  for  I 
have  not  confined  myself,  as  tourists  are  wont  to 
do,  to  the  aristocratic  quarters  of  Spanish  cities.  On 
the  contrary,  I  have  wandered  for  many  a  long  hour 
among  the  barrios  bajos — the  Injvirias  of  Madrid,  the 
New  World  of  Malaga,  and  the  Viha  of  Cadiz,  hob- 
nobbing with  their  denizens.  I  have  found  them 
merry,  excitable,  inquisitive,  or  quarrelsome  under 
their  liquor,  but  the  English  or  German  inebriety, 
which  attains  a  positively  animal  pitch  of  witlessness, 
they  know  not. 

Nor  does  the  art  of  getting  drunk  compose  a 
necessary  detail  of  a  Spanish  gentleman's  education. 
A  university  student  may  occasionally  be  a  gambler, 
yet  will  drink  but  moderately  ;  and  of  the  two  vices 
the  former  is  at  least  the  less  offensive  to  the  eye. 
The  college  "  drunks,"  which  form  so  glorious  and 
traditional  a  feature  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge  life, 
are  not,  and  never  could  become,  a  Spanish  insti- 
tution ;  neither  could  "  soaking,"  or  love  of  liquor 
for  the  sake  of  getting  drunk.  If  you  wander  at  night 
along  the  least   respectable   of  Spanish  streets,  it  is 


quite  within  the  bounds  of  possibility  that  you  may 
be  knifed,  or  robbed,  or  accosted  by  a  palonia ;  but 
the  chances  are  infinitely  against  your  meeting  a 
drunken  man.  I  mean  of  course  a  genuine  drunkard, 
who  has  reached  the  \\\o)\-ii'ater  mark  of  inebriation  ; 
the  staggering,  stupid,  hiccoughing  stage — and  not  a 
convivial  creature  who  in  vulgar  parlance  can  "  walk 
a  chalk  line  with  anybody,"  albeit  he  allow  himself 
the  harmless  luxury  of  a  more  or  less  articulate  song. 
And  even  the  Andalusian  tavern-haunter,  although 
he   may    be    addicted    to    trolling    the    well-known 

couplet — 

A  mi  me  giista^  me  gust  a 

Entrarme  por  las  tabernas^ 

must  not  be  confounded  with  the  common  pothouse 
bully  of  Great  Britain.  The  plebeian  of  Andalusia 
drinks  enough  to  sharpen  his  wdts  and  evoke  his  very 
considerable  supply  of  native  ingenuity.  The  British 
equivalent  drinks  enough  to  make  him  lose  whatever 
wits,  if  any,  he  possessed  while  sober.  The  latter 
resorts  to  the  public-house  primarily  for  the  sake  of 
li(luor ;  the  former,  for  that  of  company.  As  likely 
as  not,  the  Andalusian  sits  down  to  play  cards  or 
dominoes  for  a  trifling  stake,  or  thrums  his  guitar ; 
and  that  golden  manzanilla  in  the  neat  little  long, 
narrow  glasses  known  as  cahas  should  be  ready  to 
his  hand  is  rather  the  outcome  of  accident  than 
of  design. 

Drunkenness,  then,  is  so  alien  from  the  Spaniards, 
that  they  regard  it,  sometimes  with  surprise,  some- 
times with  mirth,  but  always  at  bottom  with  the 
profoundest  contempt,  as  a  filthy  and  unnecessary 
evil,   wholly    undeserving   of    pity ;    never   with    the semi-toleration  so  often  exhibited  in  countries  which 
shall  be  nameless.  On  the  Spanish  stage  it  is 
ridiculed,  as  in  the  laughable  sainete,  ^^ Los  Borrachos'' 
— but  it  is  never  condoned.  For  this  reason  one  might 
suppose  that  even  a  play  of  strong  dramatic  interest, 
such  as  The  Only  Way,  could  never  find  favour  with 
a  Spanish  audience.  The  half-besotted  aspect  of 
Sydney  Carton  would  prejudice  them  from  the  out- 
set. And  Dick  Phenyl,  in  Sweet  Lavender,  would 
appear  to  them,  not  a  generous  if  eccentric  mortal,-^ 
but  an  objectionable  debauchee  who  ought  to  be  ) 
ashamed  to  reel  into  the  compan}^  of  ladies  and 
gentlemen. 

In  no  country  of  Europe  are  the  evils  of  un- 
restrained mendicancy  more  glaringly  obtrusive. 
In  the  case  of  Madrid  alone  it  has  been  proved 
over  and  over  again  that  a  very  considerable  pro- 
portion of  the  army  of  pordioseros  who  blockade  her 
streets  are  perfectly  well  to  do,  and  have  saved  large 
sums  of  money,  while  most  of  the  remainder  are 
thoroughly   hale   and    able-bodied   folk,  who   do    no 
wuik  because  they  earn  by  begging  three  times  the 
wages  of  an  honest  labourer.  Lastly,  there  are 
the  loathsome  misbegotten  or  mutilated  wretches 
who  trade  upon  some  deformity,  the  more  unsightly 
and  revolting  the  better  for  their  interests.  The 
blind  are  the  least  offensive  ;  in  fact,  they  usually 
belong  to  a  decenter  class.  As  a  rule  they  sit 
about  the  pavement  scraping  a  fiddle,  or  perambu- 
late the  streets  with  a  guitar,  and  one  cannot 
but  admire  the  extreme  gentleness  with  which  both 
young  and  old,  rich  and  poor,  assist  the  ciego  on 
his  way,  taking  him  by  the  hand  and  leading  him 
past  all  difficult  crossings,  corners,  hoardings, 
ladders,  and  so  forth.  These  blind  musicians, 
then,  I  exclude  from  my  censure,  though  doubtless 
they  would  be  better  off,  more  useful,  and  more 
contented  if  gathered  into  some  industrial  home. 
But  nothing  can  excuse  the  deformity  class  proper, 
many  of  whom  have  large,  unhealing,  fetid  sores 
in  various  portions  of  their  person,  exposing  them 
unblushingly  to  view,  and  carefully  keeping  them 
open  as  a  constant  means  of  livelihood.  Others 
have  had  their  legs  or  arms  amputated,  and 
studiously  display  the  naked  stump.  
Speaking   of    charity   induces    me    to    recall    the 
curious  institutions  known  as  the  Ronda  del  Pecado 
Mortal,  and  the  Ronda  de  Pan  y  Hnevo.     The  former 
was  founded  in   i6gi  at  Seville,  whence  it  extended 
to    Madrid,    Leon,  Valencia,    and   other   cities.     Its 
object   was  to    rescue  fallen   women,  as  well  as    to 
warn  transgressors  generally — that  is,  all  who  went 
in  danger  of  the  deadly  sin.     As  years  progressed,  the 
Ronda  grew  to  be  a  powerful  and  wealthy  institution, 
for  it  collected  alms,  was  patronized  by  royalty,  and 
legacies  of  value  were  from  time  to  time  bequeathed 
to  its  exchequer.     The  proceeding  which  gave  it  the 
familiar  appellation  of  the   "  Ronda  (Round)   of  the 
I>)eadly  Sin  "  was  striking.     Every  night  there  would 
sally  forth   a   number  of  pious    individuals   dressed 
soberly  in    black,  and   bearing   lanterns.      Directing 
their  march  into  the  lowest  and  foulest  quarters  of 
the  city,   they  chanted  for   the   benefit    of   such    as 
they  believed  to  be  in  spiritual  peril,  lugubrious 
verses  of  a  sacred  tenor,  poor  enough  from  a 
literary  point  of  view,  but  morally  unexceptionable. 

Antonio  Flores,  in  his  Ayer,  Hoy,  y  Mahana 
(''Yesterday,  To-day,  and  To-morrow''' ),  and  Ricardo 
Sepulveda,  in  Antiguallas  (''Antiquities'' ),  have 
graphically  described  the  dismal  scene.  "Imagine," 
says  the  latter,  "the  gloomy  night;  the  lonely  streets, 
without  a  light  to  guide  the  wayfarer,  except  some 
flickering  lantern  faintly  illuminating  an  image  of  our 
Saviour ;  

The  Ronda  de  Pan  y  Huevo  (Rotmd  of  the  Bread 
and  Egg),  was  designed  to  succour  the  inner  man  in 
a  bodily,  rather  than  a  spiritual  sense.  Two  of  its 
lay  brothers,  accompanied  by  a  priest,  and  attended 
by  servants  bearing  lanterns,  litters,  and  baskets  of 
bread  and  hard-boiled  eggs,  paraded  the  streets  at 
night  with  the  same  punctuality  as  the  Pecado 
Mortal;  and  whenever  thev  discovered  a  human 
creature  believed  to  be'  famishing,  thrust  into  his 
hand  a  ration  consisting  of  a  loaf  and  two  eggs.  In 
graver  cases,  where  the  patient  was  too  extenuated  to 
accept  the  relief  by  his  own  efforts,  he  was  carried  in 
a  chair  or  litter  to  a  place  of  shelter. 

The  Ronda  in  its  primitive  form  dated  from 
1615,  when  a  couple  of  charitable  souls,  Pedro  Laso 
de  la  Vega  and  Juan  Jer6nimo  Serra,  devoted  them- 
selves to  soliciting  assistance  for  the  sick  and  needy. 
Within  a  while  the  charity — similarly  to  the  Pccado 
Mortal — developed  into  a  wealthy  and  extensive 
institution,  owning  refuges  or  asylums  at  more  than 
one  point  of  the  city,  particularly  at  the  corner  of  the 
Street  of  the  Lame  Men,  in  the  edifice  known  as 
the  Shelter  of  San  Lorenzo ;  and  the  Ronda  proper 
was  initiated — that  is,  the  nightly  patrol  I  have 
described.  The  full  title  of  the  charity  is  still  *'  The 
Brotherhood  of  Refuge  and  Piety,"  and  it  distributed 
in  alms,  between  its  commencement  and  1888, 
16,122,829  pesetas,  with  seven  and  twenty  centimos. 

So  that  the  actual  Ronda,  long  since  abolished, 
albeit  so  famous  and  familiar  a  feature  of  eighteenth 
century  Madrid,  was  merely  a  single  section  of  the 
entire  charity.  Its  object,  as  well  as  that  of  the 
shelters,  was  unexceptionable,  but  smacked  of  the 
unpractical,  and  partaking  too  largely  of  the  pro- 
miscuous and  romantic  was  apt  to  clash  from  time 
to  time  with  numerous  difficulties  The  devourers  of 
the  bread  and  eggs  were  not  invariably  of  a  deserving 
character,  nor  even  indigent.  The  same  might  be 
said  of  those  who  crowded  the  refuges  to  overflowing. 
Time  has  show^n  that  charity,  in  order  to  be  effective, 
must  not  be  indiscriminate  ;  and  this  is  an  axiom 
which  the  brothers  and  officers  of  the  Ronda,  despite 
their  kindliness  and  good  intentions,  were  slow  to 
realize.  Still,  a  measure  of  useful  work  was  certainly 
achieved  by  them,  and,  at  least  from  the  anti- 
quarian's point  of  view,  it  would  have  been  a  grievous 
pity  had  the  "  Round  of  the  Bread  and  Egg,"  with 
all  its  varied  memories  and  associations,  never  sprung 
into  existence. 

No  people  are  fonder  than  the  Spaniards  of 
music  in  all  its  forms ;  but  the  present  observations 
must  refer  to  popular  music  only.  I  need  not  recall 
that  the  favourite  form  of  Spanish  popular  music  is 
that  of  the  guitar.  As  to  the  precise  point  in  history 
when  the  guitar  rose  into  existence,  opinions  are  at 
loggerheads,  although  a  reasonable  derivation  is 
surely  from  the  Greek  Kiddpa.  Less  probable  is  the 
Hebrew  chinnor.*  The  precursor  of  the  instrument 
as  shaped  at  present  was  the  vihuela  or  land  (lute), 
principally  in  vogue  throughout  the  sixteenth,  seven- 
teenth, and  part  of  the  eighteenth  centuries.  The 
land  had  eleven  strings,  a  convex  back  to  the  belly, 
and  a  cur^-ed  top  to  the  mango  (handle) ;  for  which 
reason  it  is  said  to  have  been  difficult  to  tune.f 
It  would  seem  that  the  guitar  was  originally  used 
exclusively  for  the  playing  of  a  lively  accompani- 
ment to  the  voice,  merely  by  rasgiicando,  that  is, 
sweeping  the  strings  with  the  back  of  the  hand. 
Later  on,  the  method  of  execution  grew  more 
ambitious,  and  the  rasgueo  was  blended  with  the 
more  delicate  manipulation  which  pitnteaba,  or  struck 
the  notes  separately. 

The  national  devotion  to  this  instrument  has 
continued  unabated  to  the  present  hour,  and  in 
every  home  throughout  the  land  you  will  find  the 
family  guitar  hanging  from  its  peg  upon  the  wall. 
The  poor  man  picks  one  up  for  a  dollar  at  the 
casa  de  empenos  (pawnbroker's)  ;  the  well-to-do  selects 
it  spick  and  span,  at  twenty  times  the  price,  re- 
dolent of  new  varnish  and  inlaid  with  mother-of- 
pearl.  The  student  strums  it  in  the  inter^-als  of 
his  reading,  or  when  he  goes  de  juerga.  Men  and 
women  sing  and  dance  to  it,  from  the  modest 
amateur  or  blushing  schorita  fina  to  the  paid 
cantaores  and  bold,  impassioned  cantaoras  of  Anda- 
lusia. The  lover  serenades  his  mistress  to  its 
strains.  It  accompanies  the  soldier  to  the  war. 
The  roysterer  in    the    tavern,   the    blind    pauper   in 
the  street,  the  workman  when  his  daily  toil  is  over 
— at  this  verv'  moment  I  hear  my  shoemaker's 
apprentice  below  my  window,  executing  passages 
and  chords  mellifluous  or  the  reverse — the  nation  to 
a  man — and  woman — tinkles  it,  or  sings  and  dances 
to  it  with  greater  or  less  ability,  or  hearkens  to 
it  with  glee,  and  from  Irun  to  Tarifa,  or  Corufia 
to  Port-Bou,  where  is  the  spot  where  guitars  and 
giiitarristas  are  not  in  constant  evidence  ? 

Yet  it  is  extremely  rare  to  hear  the  guitar  played 
very  well.  I  will  endeavour  to  explain  why.  There 
are  two  manners  or  schools  of  playing.  The  first, 
the  universal  style,  is  the  flamenco  of  the  average 
amateur.  We  may  suitably  call  it  the  noisy  or 
strumming,  or  even  the  convivial  style.  In  this 
sense  guitar-playing  is  easy,  and  consists  in  render- 
ing the  national  songs  and  dances  sufficiently  well 
to  give  pleasure,  and  to  be  sung  or  danced  to.  The 
hand  sweeps  loudly  over  the  strings,  with  particular 
stress  upon  the  introductory  bars,  which  declare 
the  rhythm  of  the  whole,  and  are  called  entradas 
(openings)  ;  there  is  a  superabundance  of  rasgiieo ; 
and  the  music,  though  quaint  and  tuneful,  is 
sonorous  rather  than  delicate.  Myriads,  I  may 
say  millions,  of  Spaniards  are  efficient  guitar- 
players  after  the  amateur  flamenco  fashion,  and 
can  scamper  through  the  Malaguenas,  or  Granadinas, 
or  Scvillanas,  with  comparative  eclat.  The  blind 
men,  too,  who  so  commonly  play  in  the  streets, 
naturally  affect  this  style.  Their  performance  is 
in  the  open  air,  where  delicate  effects  are  lost; 
the  louder  the  noise  they  make,  the  wider  the 
audience,  and  consequently,  the  bigger  the  returns. 

The  best  guitar-player  I  have  met  is  an  amateur 
— in  the  sense  that  he  does  not  play  for  money — a 
young  Government  employe,  native  of  the  Canary 
Islands.  He  began  to  study  the  instrument  at 
fifteen,  and  is  now  eight  and  twenty.  In  no  respect 
does  he  resemble  the  average  flamenco  player ;  and 
although  he  has  the  whole  of  the  flamenco  repertory 
at  his  fingers'  ends — Sevillanas,  Malaguenas,  Grana- 
dinas,  Soledades,  Alegrias,  and  so  forth — it  assumes  a 
different  nature  when  he  executes  it.     His  touch  has none  of  the  rasping  hardness  of  the  street  and  tavern 
players,  or  of  the  noisy  amateurs — who  compensate  in 
violence  for  what  they  lack  in  art ;  none  of  the 
tapping  and  rapping  on  the  belly  of  the  instrument 
which  is  with  them  so  favourite  and  cheap  an 
artifice.  He  seldom  indulges  in  2ifortissi?no,  and  it  is 
obviously  with  a  better  will  that  he  plays  to  a  few 
friends  in  a  sitting-room  than  before  a  large  company. 
But  the  quiet,  delicate  melodies  which  he  evokes  and 
embelhshes  by  a  matchless  execution  and  fingering, 
resemble  those  strains  of  which  the  poet  speaks, 
"  that  might  create  a  soul  under  the  ribs  of  Death  "  ; 
and  prove  that  the  guitar,  played  as  it  can  be  played, 
is  one  of  the  most  enchanting  of  all  musical  instru- 
ments. 

The  flamenco  music,  however,  in  spite  of  its 
frequent  loudness  and  rapidity,  unites  with  these 
qualities  a  peculiar  mournfulness,  which  one  ap- 
preciates on  hearkening  to  it,  but  cannot  wholly 
explain  or  justify.  Apropos  of  this,  I  remember  a 
remark  which  occurs  in  a  bright  little  piece*  per- 
formed not  long  ago  at  one  of  the  Madrid  theatres. 
An  Andalusian  cantaora  is  singing  alegrias  ("joys") 
to  the  guitar,  in  a  cafe  cantante.  ''Joys,  does  she 
call  them,"  exclaims  one  of  the  listeners ;  "  why,  I 
have  done  nothing  but  cry  since  she  began  !  "  This 
naturally  provokes  a  laugh,  but  at  the  same  time  it 
furnishes  food  for  reflection  ;  and  it  is  not  extreme 
to  suppose  that  this  semi-mournful  tinge  derives  from 
the  cmprcinie  orientale—ixom  the  Moorish  blood  which 
courses  still  through  Andalusian  veins. 


Los  Flamencos, Fernando  Sors  was  "  the  Paganini  of  the  guitar." 
Other  eminent  guitarristas  were,  or  are,  Dionisio 
Aguado,  Tarrega,  JuUan  Areas,  and  Jose  Huerta. 

Where  do  the  best  guitars  come  from  ?  The 
answer  is,  they  come  from  any  point  within  the 
sphere  of  guitar-making.  It  cannot  be  said  with 
justice  that  any  one  city  turns  out  better  guitars 
than  any  other.  Some  players  speak  highly  of  the 
Sevillian  guitar,  which  is  low  in  the  cerco  or  body; 
others  swear  by  the  Valencian,  but  the  genius  loci 
influences  but  little.  In  any  of  the  larger  cities  the 
connoisseur  will  have  no  difficulty  in  finding  a  gui- 
tarvero  who  can  turn  him  out  a  first-class  instrument 
— for  plenty  of  manufacturers  can  fashion  splendid 
instruments  when  they  choose ;  though  only  in  ex- 
ceptional cases  is  it  worth  their  while  to  do  so. 
The  showy  and  worthless  guitarras  de  batalla, 
plentifully  inlaid,  go  off"  by  thousands,  but  a  high 
quality  instrument,  alwa3's  of  rather  severe  appear- 
ance, is  rarely  made  except  to  order,  for  none  but 
artists  appreciate  its  worth.  The  expert  who  knows 
what  he  is  about  will  even  select  the  wood  him- 
self, and  narrowly  instruct  the  builder  as  to  its 
colocacion  or  fitting — a  very  important  factor.  Yet 
even  thus,  the  price  of  an  admirable  guitar  is  not 
excessive,  and  need  never  run  beyond  a  couple  of 
hundred  pesetas. 
The comparsas are folk of the humbler classes who
form a band, chiefly composed of guitars, bandurrias,and guiros,
the latter resembling a nutmeg grater, and
rasped by any piece of metal that comes handy.
Thus equipped, the comparsas parade the streets at night, 
during almost any portion of the period that 
intervenes between Christmas and Carnival.
Far less harmonious than the foregoing are the
murgas and the cencerradas. The former is a band,
usually scanty in numbers (its only merit), and which
haunts assiduously the premises of people gladdened,
or supposed to be gladdened, by any recent windfall
or occurrence of a gratifying character. A has
opened a shop. A murga for him !

The  Council  of  Trent  was  the  first  to  tackle  this 
gross  and  absurd  custom,  and  in  1765  Charles  the 
Third  of  Spain  attempted  to  further  the  good  work  of 
suppression  by  punishing  with  a  fine  of  a  hundred 
dollars  and  four  years'  imprisonment,  not  only  the 
performers  upon  kettles,  pots,  and  frying-pans,  but 
also  those  who  bore  them  any  company  in  the juerga. 

Notwithstanding,  Spain  conserves  a  sturdy 
fondness    for    the    ccncerrada,    and    not    long     ago 
a  ludicrous  incident  befell  in  Seville.  A  barber 
{not  the  historic  Figaro),  who  had  organized  and 
led  full  many  a  cencerrada  in  his  younger  days, 
decided  to  enter  for  the  second  time  the  holy  estate 
of  matrimony.  No  sooner  had  the  wedding  night 
arrived  than  his  former  victims,  to  the  number  of 
I  dare  not  say  how  many  hundreds — or  possibly 
thousands— blockaded  half  his  barrio  with  a  gigantic 
cencerrada  of  retaliation.  The  Civil  Guards  were 
needed  to  maintain  order  and  assuage  the  lacerated 
feelings  of  the  newly-wedded  pair.  Nor  was  the 
least  of  the  fun  of  the  fair  the  humorous  poem 
relative  to  the  event,  published  by  Felipe  P6rez  y 
Gonzalez  in  El  Liberal,  and  aptly  titled  ''  The 
Barber  of  Seville." 

But  the  charm,  antiquity,  and  interest  of  Spanish 
dances  centre  in  the  bailes  regionales  :  first  and  fore- 
most among  which  are  the  Andalusian,  incomparable 
for  grace,  activity,  and  tunefulness.  Among  the 
older  forms,  the  fandango  and  the  bolero  are  still 
danced ;  the  cachucha  I  believe  to  be  extinct.  Now- 
adays, too,  there  are  the  Sevillanas  and  the  Mala- 
guenas.  In  these  the  lithe  bodies  of  the  Andaluzas 
move  with  the  sinuosity  of  a — but  I  should  offend 
by  the  metaphor.  (This  mystery  will  unravel  to 
you  in  the  next  chapter  but  one,  when  we  examine 
Spanish  superstitions.)  For  the  present  I  will  only 
say  that  I  was  about  to  mention  a  certain  legless 
animal,  /  lagarto  !  /  lagarto  !  In  any  event,  then,  the 
Andaluza's  twinkling  steps  are  attended  all  the 
while  by  the  crisp,  quick  rattle  of  the  castanets, 
palillos  in  the  vulgar  tongue,  but  lineal  descendants, 
if  my  memory  serves  me,  of  the  crnsmata  cited  by 
old  Martial. 

Similarly  as  the  Andalusians  in  the  dances  I 
have  instanced,  the  Valencians  glory  in  their  chdqnera 
vclla,  and  el  uy  el  dos ;  the  Catalans  in  their  sardana; 
the  Vascongados  in  their  aurresku ;  the  Galicians  in 
their  gal Icga das  and  muiheira ;  the  Asturians  in  their 
dam:a  prima,  and  the  Aragonese  in  their  sprightly 
jota.  This  latter  I  believe  to  be  as  old  as  any.  Pedro 
Sapiito  derives  it  from  a  yet  earlier  dance,  the  canario, 
said  to  have  been  popular  among  the  Moors.  Other 
authorities  ascribe  its  invention  to  an  Arab,  Aben-jot, 
who   flourished    in    the    twelfth  century.      

Not  all  of  these  regional  dances  are  equally 
pleasing  to  the  eye ;  but  handed  down  from  genera- 
tion to  generation,  they  afford  in  every  instance  a 
precious  index  to  the  history  and  spirit  of  their 
possessors,  and  even  those  which  are  least  engaging 
to  the  on-looker  are  fully  able  to  atone  in  interest 
and  originality  for  what  they  lack  in  beauties  of  a 
more  extrinsic  character. 

CHAPTER    V.  POPULAR    LITERATURE. 

"  This  fierce  digression  hath  to  it  circumstantial 
branches."  For  it  serves  to  insist  on  the  personal 
and  historic  memories  revived  from  time  to  time  by 
the  utterances  of  the  vulgar ;  nor  is  any  language 
more  exuberant  than  Spanish  in  these  quaint  old- 
world  allusions.  Suppose  yourself  to  have  made  all 
preparations  for  a  journey,  or  marriage,  or  any  affair 
in  general — and  that  an  unforeseen  mishap  annuls 
them  :  you  are  promptly  likened  to  "  the  betrothed 
of  Rota."  For  it  seems  that  once  upon  a  time, 
at  the  insignificant  village  of  Rota,  near  Cadiz,  a 
maiden  was  deserted  by  her  faithless  swain  upon 
her  wedding-day,  or  rather,  the  day  that  was  to 
have  witnessed  her  wedding — and  at  the  very  door 
of  the  church.  Accident  has  condemned  her  to 
immortality.  She  has  become  a  type  for  jilted 
maidens  and  spoiled  affairs  throughout  the  whole 
Peninsula. 

The  coplas  at  large  pertain  to  no  one  region  abso- 
lutely, but  Andalusia  is  their  home  by  preference ; 
these  latter  bearing  a  stamp  peculiarly  their  own, 
which  manifests  in  a  very  unmistakable  and  curious 
degree,  the  intensely  jealous  and  passionate  disposi- 
tion, not  of  the  European,  but  of  the  Moor : — 


All  of  the  above  coplas  are  essentially  Andalusian. 
The  nicest  translation  would  fail  to  convey  an 
adequate  idea  of  their  pathos  (for  the  Andalusian, 
when  in  love,  seems  ever  to  hanker  after  an  almost 
morbid  melancholy)  ;  but  even  the  baldest  English 
suffices  to  show  that  there  is  nothing  vulgar  or 
plebeian  in  them.  On  the  contrary,  it  must  cause 
astonishment  that  sentiments  so  eminently  delicate 
and  refined  should  proceed  from  so  illiterate  a  source. 

/ Como  quieres  parar 
Un  charco  con  una  fuente ? 
Sale  el  sol,  se  seca  el  charco, 
Y  la  fuente  permancce. 

"  How  canst  thou  compare 
The  puddle  with  the  spring  ? 
The  sun  shines  and  dries  the  puddle. 
But  the  spring  lives  on  for  ever." 

El  amor  y  la  naranja 

Se  parecen  infimto: 

Que  por  muy  dukes  que  sean, 

Dc  agrio  tiene7i  su  poqinto. 


POPULAR    LITERATURE.  ii= 

''  Love  and  oranges, 

How  similar  are  they. 

For  however  sweet  their  taste, 

The}^  are  always  a  little  bitter." 

The  first  of  these  is  obviously  a  comparison 
between  true  and  pretended  love ;  and  in  both, 
if  we  examine  them  closely,  there  is  more  than 
beauty  and  refinement :  there  is  a  strain  of  deep 
philosophy,  as  well  as  truly  oriental  splendour  of 
description.  We  have,  perhaps,  nothing  resembling 
them  in  our  own  literature,  unless  it  be  in  certain 
passages  of  Shakespeare : — "  O,  if  the  streets  were 
paved  with  thine  eyes,  her  feet  were  much  too 
dainty  for  such  tread!"  When  Shakespeare's  ex- 
uberant fancy  conceived  this  image,  he  was,  for 
the  moment,  an  Andalusian. 

The  cantes  flamencos  are  not  less  strange  and 
interesting.  They  are  the  mixture  of  song  with 
guitar-playing  and  dancing,  which  is  so  widespread 
in  Andalusia,  and  is  said  to  proceed  from  familiar 
and  ancient  intercourse  between  the  lower  classes 
of  the  Andalusians  proper,  and  "  the  mysterious 
and  little-known  gypsies."*  Oddly  enough,  Borrow, 
whose  opinion  would  have  carried  weight,  says 
little  or  nothing  about  this  extraordinary  music. 
The  cantes  flamencos  are  always  melancholy,  insist- 
ing exclusively  upon  the  seamy  side  of  life  — 
misfortune  in  love,  sickness,  poverty,  orphanage, 
war  —  all  that  is  doleful  or  mortifying.  Nor  is 
the  manner  of  their  presentation  out  of  keeping 
with   their   matter.      They   are    sung  to  the  guitar, 

in  itself  an  instrument  by  no  means  hilarious,  the 
vocalist  {cantaor,  or  cantaora,  according  to  sex) 
sitting  gravely,  and  usually  with  arms  akimbo, 
by  the  side  of  the  accompanist,  while  the  guitar 
does  all  it  can  to  be  worthy  of  them.  Never  were 
vocal  strains  more  distressfully  emitted.  A  single 
word  or  syllable  meanders  on  and  on  through 
infinite  shades  of  groans  and  gurgles,  which  reach 
their  wofuUest  when  the  guitar  pauses  altogether. 
Thev  are  now  said  to  be  livianas,  and  at  this 
crisis  the  effect  upon  a  connoisseur  is  exquisitely 
moving.  Under  such  conditions  the  threnody, 
for  such  it  is,  extends  to  a  length  completely 
out  of  keeping  with  the  brevity  of  the  copla ; 
and  an  oratorio  becomes  ephemeral  by  com- 
parison. 

The  whole  performance  is  so  utterly  unlike  any- 
thing else  within  the  domain  of  music,  that  I  must 
confess  to  finding  it  fantastic  and  dispiriting,  rather 
than  agreeable ;  nor,  as  a  general  rule,  is  it  the 
educated  classes  who  can  appreciate  the  cante 
flamenco  at  all.  The  talent,  I  imagine,  is  not  a 
healthy  one.  So  persistent  a  melancholy  savours 
strongly  of  the  decadent  or  depraved.  Yet  among 
its  devotees  the  professional  cantaor  is  quite  a  little 
king.  Machado  y  Alvarez  relates  oi  Fillo,  the  Mario 
of  cantaores,  that  "  no  man,  however  manly  he  were, 
could  listen  to  him  without  weeping."  Others  of 
like  renown  and  genius  were  Cnrro  Duke,  Paco  the 
Sevillian,  and  Qinqui. 

The  Andalusian  copias  reveal  a  striking  subtlety, 
not  only  in  their  choice  of  subject,  but  even  in 
points   of  grammar   and    vocabulary.    
In    spite    of  their  apparent  shortness,  the)-  are  really  elaborate, 
with  an  elaboration  which  is  not  less  meritorious 
in  that  it  is  unstudied  and  unconscious.  The 
popular  classes  of  Andalusia  possess,  without  being 
aware  of  it,  the  enviable  faculty  of  hitting  at  once 
upon  the  right  word  to  express  their  inmost 
sentiment  —  a  ciiriosa  fdicitas  which  renders  their 
songs  inimitable.  The  language  is  as  explicit  and 
exact  as  possible,  even  where  there  is  metaphor ; 
and  the  very  best  of  imitations  from  a  scholarly 
hand  must  fall  far  short  of  the  vulgarer  original ; 
so  much  so,  that  inexpert  as  I  must  justly 
consider  myself,  and  a  foreigner  to  boot,  I 
could  readily  distinguish  whether  a  copla  were 
the  sensation  of  a  peasant,  or  the  simulation  of 
a  scholar. 

A  acjuel  pajarit'j^  marc, 
Que  canta  en  la  verde  oliva, 
Digale  listed  que  se  caJlc, 
Que  sii  can  tar  me  lastima. 

''Mother,  that  bird 
Singhig  in  the  green  olive, 
Tell  him  to  be  silent, 
Because  his  song  Iiiirt};  nie.'' 


A  aquel  pajarito,  mare, 
Que  canta  en  la  rama  verde, 
Digale  listed  que  se  calle, 
Porque  su  canto  me  ofende. 

"Mother,  that  bird 
Singing  in  the  green  foliage, 
Tell  him  to  be  silent. 
Because  his  song  offends  ;«^." 

Here  are  two  varieties  of  the  same  copla.  The 
second  is  professedly  identical  with  the  first,  with  the 
exception  of  four  words.  These  words  are  neverthe- 
less sufficient  to  show  that  the  first  is  the  true  and 
popular,  and  the  second  the  spurious  and  erudite 
rendering.  The  "green  olive"  of  the  former  is 
replaced  with  notable  loss  by  the  "green  foliage"  of 
the  latter.  Quo  and  porque  are  another  index,  equally 
clear.  Que  is  popular ;  porque.,  the  ordinary  tame 
because,  is  academical  and  trite.  Cantar  is  just  as  sig- 
nificant. It  is  here  a  modismo,  or  usage  of  the  vulgar, 
while  canto  is  dictionary  for  song  in  general.  Finally, 
lastima  is  outraged  by  the  substitution  of  ofende.  The 
verb  lastimar  means  to  hurt  physically,  to  do 
bodily  harm  to.  When  a  person  falls  downstairs,  or 
lets  slip  a  knife  while  cutting  bread,  one  asks, ''  ^se  ha 
lastimado  Vd?  (have  you  hurt  yourself  ?)''  0 fender 
is  merely  to  offend,  to  throw  into  a  huff.  The 
distinction  is  evident.  The  former  applies  to  a  person 
in  pain  ;  the  second  smacks  of  wounded  vanity  and 
snobbishness.  It  is  the  tender  heart  which  bleeds 
and  cries  out.  To  take  offence  conveys  the  idea  of 
tumid  self-importance.  The  latter  of  the  above  coplas 
was  written  to  be  read  :  the  former  is  the  involuntary 
exclamation  of  a  tortured  heart,  crying  for  consola- 
tion, and  for  the  silence  in  which  it  hopes  to  discover 
consolation. 

Another  feature  of  the  Andalusian  coplas,  including 
those  of  the  flamenco  species,  is  their  frequent  and 
effective  use  of  diminutives.  Such  are  the  resources 
at  the  minstrel's  command  that  he  can  form  a  diminu- 
tive, not  only  from  any  noun,  but  from  almost  any 
part    of   speech    at    all.      Thus,  in    a    collection    of 
Andalusian  cantarcs  I  find  caiiipaiiillita,  from  campana, 
a  bell ;  thence  campanilla,  a  small  bell ;  and  by  adding 
yet  another  diminutive  suffix,  campanillita,  an  exceed- 
ingly small  bell,  or  as  we  might  otherwise  say,  a  little 
bit  of  a  tiny  bell.  If  only  the  author  of  The  wee  wee 
Man  had  written  in  Spanish  ! 


The  aim  of  this  constant  introduction  of 
diminutives  is  the  suggestion  of  pathos ;  and  the 
effect  is  further  intensified  by  the  strangeness  of 
the  Andalusian  pronunciation,  which  is  soft  and 
mellow,  with  a  tendency  to  lisp  and  slur,  omitting 
any  consonants  that  savour  of  cacophony  or 
harshness.  Thus  ido  is  contracted  into  io ;  todo 
{all)  becomes  to'o ;  and  the  sibilance  of  an  5  is 
reduced   to    the    merest   whisper. 


Says  the  author  of  the  Discnrsos  de  la  Nobleza  dc 
Espaha,    "  It   was   customary    with    the    Athenians, 
Romans,   and    other   nations,    that    their   cities    and 
repubhcs  should  possess  a  coat  of  arms  and  motto." 
In  no  country  is  this  usage  more  widely  spread  or 
more  deeply  rooted  than  in  Spain,  for  which  reason 
a   glance    at    the   arms    of  her   principal  cities    and 
boroughs  is  not  irrelevant  to  this  chapter  ;    and  let 
me  add   that   they  boast,  not   only   arms,  but   titles 
in     addition.        Now     and    again,    while    thumbing 
some    ancient    chronicle,    one     finds    recorded    the 
occasion  when  those  dignities  were  granted  ;  a  feat 
of  arms,    a    plucky    sortie,    a    long    sustained    siege, 
and    so   forth.      Thus   the    ancient   and   honourable 
city  of  Leon  displays  a  lion  rampant  (the  pugilistic 
attitude   of  the   forepaw  is   striking),   and  for  motto 
Muy  Noble,  Muy  Leal,  e  Ilustre  Ciudad — to  wit.  Very 
Noble,  Very  Loyal,  and  Illustrious  City.     The  arms  of 
Cadiz    are  Hercules,  reputedly  the  founder   of  that 
venerable    and    evil-smelling  seaport.     He  is  in  the 
scanty    costume   which   was   w^ell   enough,    perhaps, 
some    thousands    of  years    before   our  Saviour,  and 
strokes    the    manes   of  a   couple  of  frolicsome    and 
diminutive    lions,    of    the   bulk   of   a    rather   under- 
sized fox  terrier.     Segovia  has  for  arms  her  famous 
viaduct;    Cuenca,  the   Holy  Grail   (or  so  it  seems), 
surmounted  by  a   star  ;    Albacete,  three  towers  and 
a  bat ;    Santander,    a   ship   and   sea,   together    with 
a   tower   or    lighthouse,    and    a   couple    of    severed 
human    heads,   floating   gruesomely   in    a    blue    sky. 
Granada  is  quite  a  scrap-book — roses,  castles,  flags, 
kneehng  figures,  lions  guardant,  and  lions  rampant, 
to    say   nothing    of  a    motto    a    mile    long,    and    a 
bright  shield  as  blue  as  her  own  heaven.  Malaga 
is  represented  by  her  alcazar ;  Guadalajara  by  a 
knight  on  horseback,  leading  quite  a  little  army 
of  men  against  the  walls  of  the  town,  with  what 
seems  to  be  unnecessary  craft  and  circumspection, 
for  the  gate  is  wide  open,  and  not  a  sentinel  is 
anywhere  to  be  seen  ;  Coruna,  by  what  appears  to 
be  the  leaning  tower  of  Pisa,  straightened  out  for 
occasion  and  surmounted  by  an  open  book  bearing 
the  word  Constitncion.  Underneath  are  a  skull  and 
crossbones,  and  on  either  side  three  mushrooms, 
gloves,  or  ink-pots — I  am  uncertain  which.  Palma 
of  course  includes  a  palm.  Orense  is  an  apoplectic- 
looking  lion,  dancing  a  hornpipe  on  a  ver}-  unsub- 
stantial bridge,  at  one  end  of  which  is  a  tower. 
The  "  Noble  and  Loyal  Town  "  of  Caceres  has 
merely  a  castle  and  a  lion  rampant.  This  is  in 
better  taste.  Toledo  is  a  double  eagle,  with  the 
lions  and  castles  of  the  ancient  kingdoms  which 
these  words  imply ;  and  Barcelona,  two  crosses 
and  four  crimson  stripes  upon  a  yellow  ground, 
drawn,  says  the  legend,  by  the  four  fingers  of  an 
old-time  knight  or  king,  with  blood  that  trickled 
from  his  wounds  upon  the  field  of  battle. 


Whenever  you  sneeze  in  the  company  of  Spaniards, 
and  particularly  of  the  fair  sex,  you  are  pretty  certain 
to  be  met  with  the  ejaculation  ''Jesus'' ;  or  else 
''Jesus,  Maria,  y  Jos^'' ;  or  '' Dws  le  ayude  (God  help 
you)."  The  Sevillians  commonly  believe  that  this 
usage  originated  in  their  own  city,  in  consequence  of 
a  plague  which  raged  there  in  1580  and  1581.  This 
plague  was  known  as  the  catarro  or  moquillo.  Ortiz 
de  Ziifiiga  and  Espinosa,  chroniclers  of  Seville,  both 
make  reference  to  it ;  and  we  learn  that  the  stricken.

These are  songs  in  simple  language,  simply  versified,  and 
many  are  of  great  beauty  and  even  literary  merit. 
Assuredly  there  are  few  short  poems  of  a  popular 
description  which  surpass  the  legend  of  Saint 
Catherine  : — 
En  Cadiz  hay  una  nina. 
Ay  si, 
Que  Catalina  se  llama, 
Ay  si,  etc. 

Being  a  Welshman,  and  therefore  of  a  super- 
stitious race,  I  must  plead  guilty  to  a  lurking 
fondness  for  the  history  and  divergencies  of  super- 
stitions in  all  parts  of  the  world,  as  well  as  for  the 
folk-lore  bearing  upon  them.  The  Spaniards,  with 
the  exception  of  the  gypsies,  are  not  largely  super- 
stitious— far  less  so  than  my  own  countrymen,  or 
even  than  the  English.  In  Andalusia  it  is  a 
common  belief  that  it  is  ill-omened  to  extinguish  a 
lighted  match ;  for  this  reason  it  is  thrown  down  and 
suffered  to  burn  itself  out — a  proceeding  fraught  with 
no  little  danger  in  a  crowded  highway  or  inflammable 
building.  But  the  most  universal  superstition  in  the 
whole  of  Spain — accentuated,  nevertheless,  more 
strongly  in  Andalusia  than  in  other  parts — is  the 
horror  of  a  snake,  however  harmless  it  may  be.  The 
word  for  snake  is  ciilebra ;  but  I  warn  the  intending 
traveller  in  those  parts  that  if  he  uses  it  unguardedly 
his  Spanish  neighbours  will  surely  "  cut  "  him.  The 
antidote  to  the  evil  influence  of  culebra  is  to  repeat 
the  word  lagarto  (lizard)  ;  and  if  ever  you  let  slip  a 
culebra  in  company  it  is  dismally  funny  how  your 
hearers,  with  glances  of  the  profoundest  horror, 
ejaculate  in  chorus  "  /  Ay,  lagarto,  lagarto,  lagarto  !  " 
etc.,  ad  lib.  They  will  never  themselves  say  culebra 
outright.  Their  manner  of  naming  the  dreaded 
creature  is  infinitely  vaguer  and  (presumably)  safer. 
They  merely  characterize  it  as  la  biclia  (the  animal), 
and  even  then  display  a  tendency  to  cross  themselves 
and  utilize  the  talismanic  ejaculation  alluded  to. 


CHAPTER    VII.  THE     NATIONAL     FIESTAS. 

Hortaleza,  where  he  receives  a  barley  wafer  and  is 
blessed  by  the  priest.  The  excursion  is  indeed 
whimsical.  From  early  morning  until  eight  at  night 
transit  is  impossible.  Up  and  down  the  Montera 
and  the  Hortaleza  pass  and  repass  the  privileged 
to  benediction  in  two  interminable  strings  of  trotting 
beasts.  There  is  neither  asinine  nor  equine  caste 
distinction  on  Saint  Anthony's  Day.  The  champ- 
ing stallion  of  His  Excellency  the  Minister  hobnobs 
with  the  lowly  sardina  of  the  cache  dc  alquilcr,  the 
mettlesome  courser  with  the  omnibus  mule,  the 
Andalusian  jennet  with  the  verdulero's  donkey.  The 
mighty  are  condescending  with  the  meek ;  the  meek 
take  courage  and  mend  their  pace,  their  ribbons 
flaunting  on  the  air.  On  the  pavement  the  packed 
throng  makes  merry.  Maidens  giggle,  sly  fellows 
whispering  in  their  ear,  diciendolcs  cosas.  Beggars 
and  sellers  of  barley  cakes  and  images  of  the  Saint 
liacen  su  agosto,  balconies  swarm  with  on-lookers 
as  thick  as  flies,  and  the  portal  of  the  church 
is  decked  with  gaudy  hangings.  Such  are  las 
vueltas  de  San  Anion. 

The  Carnival  of  a  couple  of  centuries  ago,  or 
Carnestolendas,  as  it  was  then  more  generally  termed 
{Carnaval  being  scouted  as  an  Italianism)  was  quite 
as  witless  and  extravagant,  if  neither  so  widespread 
nor  so  sumptuous  as  at  the  present  day.  There 
were  the  same  carrozas,  the  same  liberties,  the  same 
abuses,  the  same  numskuUed  masqueraders,  both  on 
foot  and  horseback ;  but  the  jokes  were  coarser  and 
more  brutal,  and  the  risk  of  bloodshed  infinitely 
greater  where  the  truculent  tizona  was  ever  read}' 
to  hand.     For  of  the  Spanish  caballero  of  those  times 
it  may  at  least  be  said  that  he  hazarded  his  hfe  with 
imperturbable  coolness.  He  appeared  to  believe 
that  amusement  was  his  only  motive  for  living  at  all ; 
and  that  even  the  suppression  of  life  was  merely, 
under  certain  conditions,  a  form  of  recreation. 
Therefore,  when  the  Angel  of  Death  pulled  his 
velvet  cloak  or  made  an  assignation  with  his  wife, 
or  shot  upon  his  head  a  bucket  of  garbage  or  water 
from  an  upper  window,  he  heard  the  summons  and 
was  ready. 

Nowadays  these  matters  are  more  prudently 
arranged.  The  world  is  divided  between  one  or 
other  of  two  characters :  the  automaton,  who  is 
finally  and  wholly  incapable  of  amusement ;  and 
the  cynic,  who  allows  himself  to  be  for  ever  amused, 
viewing  his  entire  existence  as  an  infinite,  though 
passive  and  emotionless  Carnival.  The  Divorce 
Court  deals  peacefully  and  effectively  with  the 
assignation  question ;  the  buckets  of  offal  and  water 
are  replaced  by  glittering  confetti  and  ingratiating  ser- 
pentinas ;  nor  is  it  of  life  or  death  significance  to 
tweak  a  masker's  cloak.  Nevertheless,  not  all  our 
inkling  of  romanticism  has  even  yet  abandoned  us, 
and  there  is  something  dimly  seductive  about  these 
old-time  swaggering  cavaliers,  their  hand  for  ever 
upon  their  rapier  hilt,  their  long  mustachios  a  la 
borgonona  fiercely  up-twirled,  and  sniffing  at  every 
stride,  though  bent  ostensibly  on  pleasure,  a  bloody 
passage  of  unpitying  thrusts,  conducing  to  a  double 
crime,  a  suicide  and  a  murder. 

A  hundred  thousand  people  surge  between  the 
Puerta  del  Sol  and  the  Columbus  Monument  in  the 
Castellana.  The  Calle  Alcala,  Paseo  de  Recoletos, 
and  Paseo  de  las  Delicias,  to  say  nothing  of  the 
narrower  adjacent  thoroughfares,  are  stuffed  with 
shouting  and  perspiring  humanity,  not  the  interval 
of  a  head  between  any  two ;  and  it  is  a  matter  of 
twenty  minutes  to  turn  the  corner  at  the  Ministry 
of  War.  Torrents  of  confetti ;  carload  upon  carload 
of  revellers ;  paper  streamers  circling,  unwinding, 
fluttering,  and  catching  in  clothes,  and  trees,  and 
balconies,  and  lamp-posts.  Ministers  and  nobles  in 
their  carriages,  bowing  and  bending;  the  Infanta 
Isabel,  aunt  of  the  King,  in  her  victoria,  with  half  a 
dozen  masqueraders  clinging  to  the  splashboard, 
whispering  sweet  nothings  in  the  royal  ear,  and 
basking  in  the  good-natured  smiles  of  the  Princess  ; 
Roman  warriors  and  matrons  in  a  carroza  drawn 
by  a  dozen  frisky  horses ;  Bacchus  and  Bacchantes 
in  another ;  Cleopatra  in  a  litter ;  Clowns,  Devils, 
Neapolitans,  Moors,  Galicians,  Zaragozans,  Andalu- 
sians,  Valencians,  Generals,  Monks,  Inquisitors — 
there  is  no  end  to  the  variety.  Everythmg  above 
the  earth,  or  in  it,  or  beneath — that  runs,  or  flies,  or 
creeps,  or  jumps,  or  swims — everything  that  has  or 
simulates  the  breath  of  life  is  represented  or  carica- 
tured ;  "  devices  quaint  and  frolics  ever  new  tread 
on  each  other's  kibes,"  and  the  animal  and  vegetable 
realms  have  been  rummaged  to  their  inmost  depths 
to  furnish  subjects  for  King  Carnival. 

CHAPTER    VIII.  THE    BULLFIGHT. 

'HERE  is  an  air  about  my  street  which 
tells  me,  plainer  than  any  notice  in  the 
paper  or  placard  on  the  wall,  that  my 
neighbours  are  preparing  to  enjoy  them- 
selves. The  barber's  shop  is  better 
patronized  than  usual,  and  I  observe  a  number  of 
familiar  faces  scrupulously  scraped  that  go  unshaven 
all  the  week.  The  patatera  downstairs  is  brushing 
out  her  manton  de  Manila  while  the  boy  puts  up 
the  shutter,  and  the  privileged  chiilo  who  lives  upon 
her  earnings  and  passes  for  her  lawful  spouse  runs 
off  to  call  a  siinun.  Surely,  too,  it  was  the  peinadora 
I  saw  emerging  from  the  first-floor  gabinete  opposite, 
the  private  residence  of  the  prcstamista,  whose  three 
delightful  daughters  I  happen  to  know  are  abonadas 
to  the  tcndidos  de  sombra  of  the  bull-ring,  together 
with  their  chaperon  and  mamma,  for  paterfamilias, 
like  the  busv  bee  of  the  maxim,  is  not  to  be  wooed 
from  his  pursuit  of  golden  honey. 

The  Spaniard  attends  the  bullfight,  if  he  be  rich, 
luxuriously ;  if  poor,  modestly  ;  if  penniless,  fraudu- 
lently, scurvily,  raggedly,  what  you  will ;  but  b\'  a 
notable  coincidence  he  is  never  so  poor  as  not 
to  attend  it  at  all,  or  at  least  some  portion  of  it. 
The  aristocrat,  handling  the   ribbons  himself,  must 
drive  his  spanking  team,  a-jangling  with  the  bells 
upon  their  harness,  up  to  the  principal  entrance  of 
the  plaza,  his  wife  and  daughters  resplendent  in  silks 
and  satins  and  the  classical  mantilla.  Theirs  is  the 
Olympic  and  costly  palco,  whence  they  survey  with 
serene  superciliousness  the  vulgarer  publico  at  their 
feet.  The  merely  well-to-do,  without  a  title  to  his 
name,  or  a  million  to  his  cuenta  corriente  at  the  bank, 
contents  himself  with  a  dclantera  de  gradas  or  a 
barrcra  in  the  shade  ;  the  less  acomodado  with  a  ditto 
or  ditto  in  the  sun ;  the  government  clerk  or  shop- 
man with  a  plain  asiento  de  tendido ;  the  necesitado 
with  the  andanadas  or  the  upper  and  cheaper  tendidos 
de  sol.  Nay,  even  the  golfillos  or  little  urchins  who 
lurk  in  countless  swarms  about  the  plaza,  and  who 
certainly  have  not  a  centimo  at  all  wherewith  to  bless 
(or  is  it  curse  ?)  themselves,  have  discovered  a  number 
of  porous  spots  in  the  ironwork  which  ventilates  the 
outer  wall,  and  squeeze  and  clamber  through  a  space 
which  would  appear  incapable  of  admitting  a  fives 
ball,  much  less  a  human  head  and  body.  Adventurous 
ragamuffins  !  Hence  they  witness,  not  so  much  the 
bullfight,  as  the  historic,  awe-inspiring  territory 
where  the  bullfight  is  actually  being  celebrated. 

that happy  goal  so  infinitely  prized,  and  yet  which  all 
Madrid'  is  competent  to  attain  ?  For  remember 
that  even  our  golfillos  have  stealthily  hung  behind 
the  backs  of  many  a  carriage,  and  reached  this 
earthly  paradise — at  the  trifling  risk  of  a  broken 
bone  or  two,  or  a  tickling  with  the  lash — free,  gratis, 
and  for  nothing.  For  nothing,  did  I  say  ?  For 
everything  !  For  the  corrida  de  toros  ! 
A  A  circular,  two-storeyed  edifice,  solidly  built  of 
blood-red  brick,  in  an  imitation  of  Moorish  architec- 
ture that  is  obviously  sham  and  modern,  but  neither 
inelegant  nor  tawdry.  There !  I  have  sprung  from 
the  footboard  of  the  tram  upon  a  waterseller's   toe. 


He  glares  at  me,  and  to  mollify  him  I  buy  a  glass 
of  water;  truly,  as  he  claims  for  it,  the  coldest  and 
best  obtainable,  from  the  Fiiente  del  Berro,  the 
limpid  spring  that  gurgles  gratefully  past  yonder 
hill.  Laboriously  I  elbow  past  the  sellers  of  nuts, 
and  fans,  and  oranges,  and  seats  for  the  corrida, 
laboriously  through  the  labyrinth  of  wheels,  laboriously 
between  the  narrow  turnstiles,  thronged  with  can- 
didates for  entrance,  laboriously  along  the  packed 
passages,  and  out  into  the  roomier  redondel  or  ring, 
.where  the  fight  will  be  within  three-quarters  of 
an  hour,  but  swarming  now  with  fashionables  and 
aficionados  of  every  degree,  but  chiefly  of  the  ex- 
quisite and  polio  order,  who  like  to  air  their  Sunday 
suits,  clean  linen,  and  Cordoba  hats,  and  generally 
appear  de  inoda. 

Ha!  There  is  Fulano  ;  "  Buenas  tardes,  polio  I  " 
And  Mengano,  with  his  wife  upon  his  arm.  "  A  Los 
pies  de,  Vd.,  Sehora. 

The  corrida  is  a  lleno  completo :  above  me  the  boxes 
and  andanadas  are  packed  to  overflowing,  so  are  the 
tendidos  to  either  side,  and  the  barreras  and  contra- 
barreras  beneath :  not  a  seat  is  vacant,  even  among 
the  13,011  the  plaza  is  stated  to  contain.  Everything 
is  restless,  nervous,  merry,  excited,  exuberant  motion  ; 
hands  and  faces,  dresses  and  fans,  and  black 
mantillas  and  white.  Threading  their  way  between 
the  serried  ranks,  and  husky  with  shouting  "  ^  Quien 
les  quiere  tost-a-os  ?  "  "  Quien  les  quiere?  "  *  and  similar 
invitations,  are  the  sellers  of  nuts  and  oranges, 
lemonade,  and  water. 

By  far  the  greater  number  of  the  toros  bravos,  or 
fighting-bulls,  are  Andalusian,  the  property  of  one 
or  other  of  various  breeders  (ganaderos),  who  are 
invariably  men  of  wealth,  and  sometimes  of  title. 
Among  the  names  of  noble  ganaderos,  past  or  actual, 
are  those  of  the  Marquises  of  Gaviria,  la  Conquista, 
Salas,  Sales,  Gandul,  Villamarta,  los  Castellones, 
Saltillo,  Ruchena,  Medina,  Castrojuanillos,  and 
Villavelviestre,  the  Counts  of  Patilla  and  Vistaher- 
mosa,  and  the  Dukes  of  San  Lorenzo,  Osuna,  and 
Veragua.     Ladies,  too,  commonly  by  inheriting  the 
cattle  from  their  husbands,  are  and  have  been 
ganaderos,  or  I  suppose  I  should  say  ganadcras — the 
Duchess  of  Santona,  the  Marchioness  of  Saltillo, 
Dona  Carmen  Lopez,  Dona  Dolores  Zembrano, 
Dona  Celsa  Fontfrede,  Dona  Cecilia  Montoya, 
Dona  Carlota  Sanchez,  and  others.  And  curiously 
enough  three  priests  have  figured  in  the  profession — 
Don  Diego  Hidalgo  Barquero,  Don  Francisco 
Mendoza,  and  Don  Antero  Lopez.  The  latter, 
indeed,  went  so  far  as  to  brand  his  bulls  with  a 
priest's  cap  or  bonnet,  for  which  reason  the  breed 
was  known  as  the  Bonetillo. 

As  I  have  said,  the  majority  of  the  ganado  comes 
from  Andalusia,  particularly  the  neighbourhood  of 
Jerez,  Seville,  and  Huelva,  in  whose  whereabouts 
live  the  best-known  ganaderos^  excepting  the  Duke 
of  Veragua.  This  nobleman,  the  direct  descendant 
of  Columbus — bearing,  in  fact,  the  very  name  of 
Cristobal  Colon — is  the  possessor  of  one  of  the  oldest 
and  most  famous  breeds  of  fighting  cattle,  though 
his  bulls  appear  to  be  deteriorating  rapidly.  Their 
pasturage  is  at  Colmenar  la  Vieja,  not  far  from 
Madrid.  The  Andalusian  cattle  graze  upon  the 
plains  or  dchesas  of  San  Juan  de  las  Cabezas,  and 
other  of  those  thinly-populated  districts. 

Every  year  the  ganadero  holds  his  tienta,  or  trial 
of  the  fighting  qualities  of  the  calves,  a  ceremony 
which  is  intended  to  weed  the  bad  becerros  from  the 
good,  these  to  be  fought  throughout  the  plazas  of 
the  country,  the  faulty  ones  to  be  sold  for  killing  or 
agriculture.  An  intermediate  class  are  those  which 
are  fought  under  the  name  of  novillos  by  second- 
rate  matadores  or  novilleros,  and  not  in  the  corridas 
formalcs,  but  at  novilladas.  These  novillos  belonj:,^  to 
the  dcsecho  do  tienta,  the  "  rejected  in  the  proof," 
but  it  is  not  unusual  for  them  to  make  a  very 
respectable  fight,  notwithstanding.  The  tienta  can 
be  performed  in  more  ways  than  one,  but  as  a  rule 
the  young  animals  are  driven  singly  into  a  yard 
where  a  horseman,  preferably  a  picador,  aided  by  a 
helper  afoot  with  a  capote,  offers  at  them  with  a 
lance  tipped  with  a  very  small  goad,  and  consider- 
ably shorter  than  the  garrochas  employed  in  the  ring 
proper.  If  the  bull  dashes  at  the  horse,  ignores 
the  pain  of  the  goad,  and  returns  with  spirit  to  the 
charge,  he  will  do,  and  is  promoted  to  the  aprobados, 
or  selected  candidates.  The  heifers  are  also  tested, 
since  the  mettle  of  the  dam  must  narrowly  concern 
her  offspring,  and  the  semental  or  stud-bull  is  sure  to 
be  a  stately  and  expensive  beast  of  noble  presence 
and  proven  lineage. 

It  is  a  matter  of  impossibility  to  determine  which 
is  the  best  ganaderia.  The  best  are  many.  Each 
has  its  record  of  doughty  achievements,  and  spares 
no  effort  or  expense  to  keep  abreast  of  its  rivals. 
The  leading  cattle  at  the  present  day  are  those  of 
Camara,  Miura,  Muruve,  Perez  de  la  Concha,  Con- 
radi,  Adalid,  Ibarra,  Saltillo,  and  Anastasio  Martin. 
All  of  these  ar6  Andalusian.  Among  Castilian  cattle 
the  Duke  of  Veragua's  are  becoming  steadily  worse 
and  worse,  but  Don  Esteban  Hernandez,  also  a 
vecino  of  Madrid,  is  able,  at  a  pinch,  to  produce  an 
excellent  corrida. 

The  ganadero  sells  his  beasts  a  corrida  at  a  time, 
the  usual  number  being  consequently  four,  or  six,  or 
eight,  and   the  price   per  head,   in  the  case  of   the  
choicest  cattle,  ranging  from  four  to  six  hundred 
dollars,  or  between  sixty  and  one  hundred  pounds 
sterling.  The  conveyance  of  the  bulls  to  their 
destination  is  no  easy  matter.  Where  the  dis- 
tance is  comparatively  short,  as  from  one  point 
of  Andalusia  to  another,  they  are  driven  through 
the  unfrequented  parts  of  the  country  gathered  in  a 
little  herd,  pasturing  by  day  and  proceeding  by 
night,  surrounded  by  the  cabestros,  or  tame,  trained 
cattle  with  bells  round  their  necks.  These  in- 
telligent beasts  keep  the  wild  ones  together  and 
out  of  mischief  with  the  same  unerring  watchful- 
ness as  a  collie  controlling  a  flock  of  sheep,  and 
lightening  to  an  incalculable  extent  the  labours  of 
the  accompanying  horsemen. 

The  entry  into  the  town  or  village  is  made  by 
night,  the  sides  of  the  roads  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
bull-ring  being  strongly  barricaded,  and  the  compact 
herd,  headed  by  two  riders  careering  one  after  the 
other,  is  driven  at  full  gallop  plump  into  the  corrales 
of  the  plaza.  If  a  moon  be  shining,  the  spectacle, 
viewed  from  the  windows  overlooking  the  corral,  is 
indescribably  picturesque  and  eerie ;  nor  am  I  aware 
of  any  detail  of  Spanish  life  so  intensely  singular 
and  original  as  these  Andalusian  encierros,  such  as 
I  have  witnessed,  times  without  number,  at  Linea 
de  la  Concepcion  and  elsewhere.  The  safe  side  of 
the  barricade  is  packed  with  eager  aficionados,  strain- 
ing their  eyes  and  ears  and  speaking  in  a  whisper ; 
the  rest  of  the  pohlacion  (imagine  it  to  be  half-past 
one  of  the  morning)  is  profoundly  silent,  until  the 
barking  of  dogs,  suddenly  impinging  on  the  night- 
time air,  announces  that  the  corrida  is  approaching. 

I  mentioned  the  register  kept  by  the  ganaderos. 
In  spite  of  the  scrupulous   care  bestowed  upon  the 
ticnta,  the  indications  then  observed  are  by  no  means 
infaUible,  and  it  is  impossible  to    predict  with  more 
than   approximate   confidence   whether   a  given  reSy 
when  the  fatal  moment  arrives,  will  make  a  creditable 
fight  or  no.   However,  as  a  general  rule,  the  bulls  of 
certain  ganaderias  have  certain  peculiarities,  "  marks 
of  the  beast,"  so  to  speak,  or  idiosyncrasies  of  attack 
and  defence  which  the  fighters  are  solicitous  to  bear 
in  mind.   Now  and  again  a  bull  distinguishes  him- 
self by  a  more  than   usually  heroic   resistance,    and 
(very  rarely)  the  Spanish  public,   after  the  usage  of 
their  ancestors,    the   Romans,   intercede  for  his  life. 
Thus,  Cantarero,  fought  at  Jerez  on  July  26th,  1871, 
accepted  thirty-two    varas,    killing   nine    horses    and 
wounding  eleven.      At   the  request  of  the  respetable 
publico  his  life  was  spared.     Cartcro,  fought  at  Madrid 
in  1844,  killed  eleven  horses  in  twelve  varas.    Centelia, 
fought  at  Cadiz  in   1851,  accepted  fifty-three  varas, 
killing  nine  horses  and  injuring  four.     His  life  was 
pardoned  also.      And  Corcito,  the  third  bull  fought  at 
Alicante    on    July   31st,    1881,    accepted   ten    varas, 
killing  three  horses.     He  then  re-charged  upon  Pinto, 
a  picador,  and  dashed  both  him  and  his  horse  through 
the  barrera,  depositing  them  in  the  callcjon,  killing  the 
horse,  and  leaving  Pinto  in  a  very  delicate  situation, 
till  the  matadores,  Cara-Ancha  and  Gordito,  drew  off 
the  fiera's  attention. 

Not  for  a  moment  should  I  elect  to  wander  about 
an  English  meadow  in  compan}^  with  an  English 
bull  ;  but  although  this  latter  might  readily  tackle 
a  defenceless  mortal  like  myself,  it  would  astonish 
me  greatly  to  see  him  accept  a  second,  much  less 
less  a  twenty-second  puyazo  from  an  armed  and 
mounted  picador ;  and  after  that  three  pairs  of  ban- 
derillas ;  and  after  that  the  sword  of  the  matador.  All, 
of  course,  is  within  the  bounds  of  the  possible ;  but, 
given  the  placid  education  of  the  British  res^  and  the 
tranquillity  with  which  he  is  allowed  to  fill  his  belly 
to  overflowing,  and  degenerate  into  a  cade  and  com- 
fortable sleekness,  the  chances  should  be  altogether 
in  favour  of  my  argument. 

Ford  was  persuaded  that  the  Spanish  animal  is 
the  weaker  of  the  two ;  but  it  does  not  seem  to  be 
so  when  at  Seville,  in  the  summer  of  1898,  a  Muruve 
bull  walked  from  the  barrera  to  the  middle  of  the 
ring  with  a  horse  and  man  upon  his  horns ;  nor  is  it 
unusual  for  any  toro  bravo  to  throw  a  picador's  saddle 
ten  feet  into  the  air  ;  but  it  takes  two  men  to  carry 
the  saddle.     As  to  the  Spanish  bull's  superior  agility, 
this,  at  least,  is  beyond  all  possibility  of  question.  It 
is  an  everyday  feat  for  them  to  clear  the  barrera 
at  least  once ;  and  the  barrier's  height  averages 
considerably  over  five  feet.  At  Malaga,  some  six 
years  ago,  a  bull  leaped  over  the  barrier  at  pre- 
cisely the  same  spot,  fourteen  times  in  swift  suc- 
cession. At  Madrid,  in  1898,  another  cleared 
both  barriers,  landing  with  his  head  among  the 
spectators,  but  falling  back  into  the  callejon.  

The  accomplished  matador,  therefore,  must  realize 
what  kind  of  beast  he  is  killing,  and  make  his 
"  passes  "  with  suitable  circumspection.  A  "  noble  " 
bull  lends  itself,  during  the  lidia,  to  a  number  of 
effective  suertes,  where  the  same  suertes,  attempted 
with  a  cowardly  beast,  would  infallibly  mean  a  cogida. 
Any  matador  whose  name  is  well  before  the  public 
and  who  fights  at  Madrid,  Seville,  and  other  of  the 
leading  plazas,  as  well  as  during  the  principal  ferias 
throughout  the  provinces,  has  reached  the  top  of  the 
tree,  and  is  supposed  to  have  some  years  of  taurine 
education  behind  him,  so  that  he  is  fitted,  as  far  as 
practice  can  make  him,  to  judge  what  kind  of  animal 
confronts  him.  In  all  probability  he  started  as  a 
novillcro,  or  fighter  of  young  or  defective  cattle,  or 
else — perhaps  in  addition — he  has  served  as  a 
banderillero  in  the  cuadrilla  of  some  bygone  worthy, 
figuring  now  and  again  as  sobresaliente,  or  matador 
in  reserve.  In  any  case,  practice  will  have  taught 
him  much.  "  La  letra''  says  the  Spanish  pedagogic 
adage,  "  con  sangre  cntra  " — "  lessons  are  thrashed  in 
with  whipping";  so  our  hero,  by  dint  of  repeated 
revolcones,  and  probably  a  nasty  cogida  or  two,  will 
have  learned  to  scan  his  enemy  with  a  wary  eye, 
before  he  makes  his  pretty  speech  to  the  presidaicia 
and  advances  sword  in  hand  to  meet  him. 

Friends  who  have  visited  him  at  Cordoba 
during  the  shooting  season,  when  the  plazas  are  idle, 
assure  me  that  they  have  met  with  royal  hospitality 
and  lacked  nothing.  But  Guerrita  is  quite  im- 
pervious to  criticism,  which  has  the  precise  effect 
of  maddening  his  critics.  He  cares  for  no  revistero, 
no,  not  he,  and  not  many  of  the  revisteros  care  for 
him,  though  they  are  frequently  compelled  to 
applaud  his  superlative  dexterity.  He  is  fully  con- 
scious of  his  worth,  treats  the  press  with  disdain 
rather  than  with  anger,  and  can  command,  all  over 
Spain  and  in  the  south  of  France,  almost  any  re- 
muneration he  pleases.* 
Another  dies  riefastus  was  October  7th,  1900 — 
cogida  and  death  of  Dominguin  at  Barcelona  ;  two 
cogidas  of  novilleros  at  Carabanchel ;  cogida  of  Parrao 
at  Granada ;  the  picador  TelUlas  with  his  collar-bone 
broken  at  Madrid :  and  cogida  of  Bombita  in  the 
same  plaza. 

Polemico-taurine  pamphlets,  besides  the  criticism 
of  Jovellanos,  and  the  conferencia  deUvered  by  Don 
Luis  Vidart  in  the  Madrid  Ateneo.*  Not  the 
least  ori.ii^inal  of  Seiior  Vidart's  claims  is  the  one 
that  bullfighting  has  exercised  a  beneficent  influence 
on  literature !  It  is  obvious,  he  declares,  that 
Moratin  owed  his  famous  Fiesta  de  Tows  en  Madrid 
to  the  noble  art  of  the  toreo ;  unlike  the  misguided 
Ricardo  de  la  Vega,  and  Jose  Navarrete — this  last 
"a  renegade  to  his  native  land  of  Andalusia" — who 
have  made  it,  not  the  altar  of  their  inspiration,  but 
the  target  for  their  ridicule. 

However,  apart  from  this,  I  am  by  no  means 
certain  that  the  EngUsh  are  generally  adverse  to 
the  bullfight.  Far  from.  it.  The  French  maintain  a 
growing  number  of  plazas  de  tows  in  the  south  ot 
France;  but  England,  curiously  enough,  may  be 
stated  to  maintain  two  plazas  on  Spanish  territorv-. 
On  the  threshold  of  Gibraltar  are  tsso  handsome 
little  bull-rings,  those  of  Algeciras  and  La  Li'nea, 
capable  of  seating  some  seven  or  eight  thousand 
soids  apiece,  and  which  are  practically  dependent  for 
their  support  upon  the  British  garrison  and  the  semi- 
British  populadon  of  the  Rock ;  nor  are  the  plaza 
gates  sooner  opened,  a  couple  of  hours  before  the 
spectacle  is  advertised  to  begin,  than  officers  in  mufti, 
and  privates,  corporals,  lance  corporals,  and  sergeants 
in  dazzling  Sunday  uniform,  together  with  their 
firiends,  families,  and  sweethearts,  stream  truculently 
in,  as  ceaseless  as  the  Ganges.  The  English  practical 
opinion  of  a  Spanish  bullfight  is  well  expressed  by 
the  following  obser\-ation.  It  was  during  Algeciras 
fair,  when  a  bullfight  is  given  on  each  of  three 
successive  days,  that  I  asked  the  English  wife  of  an 
EngUsh  army  captain  how  she  had  relished  that 
afternoon's  corrida.  •  Oh,  it  is  dreadful,"  she  replied, 
"  horrible ;  but "  (with  a  gleam  of  pleasurable  anticipa- 
tion) "  Vm  going  again  to-inorrow." 

CHAPTER    XIII. THE  FUTURE  OF  THE  PRESENT. 


Yet  his  Minister  of  Education,  spurred  by  the  very 
best  intentions  (the  paving,  be  it  remembered,  of  a 
certain  highway  infinitely  rougher  than  any  of  the 
Madrid  streets)  in  attempting  to  reform  the  financial 
situation  of  the  national  schools,  was  so  unlucky  as  to 
reform  the  dominies'  salaries  completely  out  of  exist- 
ence. Thus,  after  the  Conser\^atives  had  been  in 
power  for  nearly  twenty  months,  it  was  found  that 
Valencia,  with  an  estimate  for  educational  purposes 
of  two  hundred  and  forty  thousand  pesetas,  had 
actually  in  hand  no  more  than  forty  thousand,  while 
Teruel  had  dropped  from  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
four  thousand  to  thirty-six  thousand,  Granada  from 
one  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  to  forty-five  thou- 
sand, Pontevedra  from  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
three  thousand  to  forty  thousand;  and  so  forth, 
throughout  all  the  provinces  of  the  country.  In 
fact,  it  was  considered  that  the  Minister's  disposi- 
tions were  more  disastrous  to  the  cause  of  national 
education  than  any  promulgated  since  1857.  Forty- 
three  years  of  retrogression ! 

Hence  the  inveterate  jealousies  which  every 
district  feels  for  every  other ;  and  whose  gravest 
manifestation  is  the  regionalismo  or  separatism 
affected  from  time  to  time  by  the  Catalans,  the 
Basques,  and  even  the  Andalusians.  The  solution 
would  seem  to  consist  in  making  all  parts  equally 
prosperous  and  endowing  all  with  equal  privileges, 
not,  as  is  done  at  present,  overtaxing  the  hardest- 
working  districts  and  stimulating  indolence  and 
stagnation  of  trade  by  compelling  the  workers  to 
maintain  the  drones. 
It  is  only  fair  to  admit  that  the  belligerent 
tone  of  those  of  the  Spanish  newspapers  which  are 
for  ever  chillando  against  the  foreigner  is  more  in 
guasa  than  in  earnest.  For  instance,  not  long  ago 
the  British  company  which  works  the  railway  run- 
ning from  Algeciras  to  Bobadilla,  required  to  erect 
a  landing  stage  at  the  former  town  (situated,  as  I 
need  not  remind  my  readers,  opposite  to  Gibraltar). 
As  soon  as  the  company  had  secured  permission 
from  the  Spanish  authorities,  the  Madrid  Hcraldo 
published  a  leader  ponicndo  cl  grito  en  las  niibcs* 
as  though  a  British  incursion  into  the  Peninsula  might 
be  expected  within  the  ensuing  twenty-four  hours. 
Probably  the  Herald&s  wrath  would  be  aimed  at 
Senor  Silvela,  rather  than  at  the  unoflending 
foreigner;  but  it  might  be  well  to  remember 
that  there  are  a  great  many  English  and  other 
foreigners  resident  in  Spain  ;  and  that  this  language 
of  extreme  alarm  is,  to  say  the  least,  undignified, 
especially  when  subjected  to  the  criticism  of  an 
alien. 

Says  the  Spanish  proverb  wisely,  "£;/  todas  paytes 
cuecen  Iiabas;''*  and  while  we  admit  the  value  of 
the  hackneyed  phrase  "  la  parsimonia  britdnica " 
("British  stinginess"),  have  my  friends  of  the 
Madrid  press  never  met  a  Spaniard  agarrado  ?  I 
have. 

Enough  of  these  ignoble  comparisons.  Spain  is 
kinder  to  the  stranger  than  her  words  would  seem 
to  promise.  The  very  journalist  who  damns  me 
in  the  columns  of  his  newspaper  is  the  very  pink 
of  courtesy  to  me  in  our  private  conversation ;  and, 
seeing  that  I  have  never  done  him  a  conscious  in- 
jury, I  find  it  difficult  to  believe  that  he  is  itching 
to  maul  me  when  my  back  is  turned.  Moreover, 
there  are  numerous  occasions  when  the  Spanish 
press  discards  its  pleasantries  anent  the  foreigner, 
and  plainly  discloses  where  the  shoe  is  pinching. 
In  El  Liberal  for  the  twenty-sixth  of  September, 
1900,  was  published  a  leader  dealing  with  precisely 
the  same  topic  as  the  Anglophobe  article  of  the 
Heraldo — namely,  the  encroachments  of  the  English 
upon  the  Campo  of  Gibraltar. 

"The  enemy,"  says  the  Liberal,  "who  gives  so 
much  to  chatter  and  be  nervous  about,  has  long  been 
among  our  own  selves.  .  .  .  Algeciras,  La  Linea, 
San  Roque,  Los  Barrios,  and  Tarifa,  towns  which 
occupy  the  Campo  of  Gibraltar  surrounding  the 
famous  English  fortress,  have  a  population  of  more 
than  seventy-eight  thousand  Spaniards. 

"  For  those  seventy-eight  thousand  Spaniards 
Spain  supports  seven  schools. 

*  "  Beans  are  boiled  everywhere." 
"And  more  than  thirty  are  the  schools  which  are 
maintained,  nominally  for  the  sake  of  religious  pro- 
paganda, by  various  British  societies  in  the  same 
towns. 

"  The  town  of  Linea  de  la  Concepcion,  containing 
more  than  thirty-eight  thousand  inhabitants,  has  no 
hospital ;  and,  being  at  all  times  filled  with  un- 
fortunate people  in  search  of  work,  every  step  reveals 
some  fresh  misfortune.  Sickness  goes  hand  in  hand 
with  hunger,  and  knocks  over  not  a  few  of  the unhappy  labourers. 

"  Very  well.  The  English  Government  offers 
shelter  in  its  Gibraltar  hospitals  to  the  sick  and 
maimed  who  are  unable  to  find  it  at  La  Linea.  .  .  . 

"  In  comparison  with  facts  of  this  nature,  which 
obtrude  upon  the  sight  and  soul  together,  cannons 
and  batteries  are  powerless.  Even  were  some  new 
Vauban  to  fortify  the  Sierra  Carbonera  and  Algeciras, 
the  invaders  would  continue  to  gain  ground,  as  they 
have  long  been  doing,  by  way  of  schools  and  factories 
and  churches ;  by  way  of  the  hospital  and  the 
thousand  paths  they  open  in  the  direction  of  work 
and  energy. 

With  regard  to  the  tax  itself,  the  duties  vary 
largely,  according  to  the  neighbourhood ;  an  in- 
justice to  begin  with.  From  a  lecture  delivered 
by  Senor  Ruiz  Jimenez,  member  of  Parlia- 
ment for  Madrid,  it  appears  that  the  Consumos 
estimate  for  that  city  figures  out  at  twenty  pesetas 
and  forty  cenfimos  per  head  per  annum,  while  in 
Barcelona  it  is  only  fourteen  pesetas  and  eight 
centimos.  In  the  estimates  per  province  and  not 
per  city,  Madrid  pays  fourteen  pesetas  and  seventy- 
one  centimos,  Barcelona,  nine  pesetas  and  thirty- 
three  centimos,  Seville  eight  pesetas,  Valladolid  seven 
pesetas  fifty  centimos,  Valencia  six  pesetas  seventy 
centimos,  and  Malaga  only  five  pesetas  thirty-five 
centimos.  In  Barcelona  the  hundred  kilos  of  coal 
pay  fifty  centimos,  in  Madrid,  eighty  centimos; 
olive  oil  pays  per  kilo,  in  Barcelona,  thirteen 
centimos,  in  Madrid  twenty-one  centimos;  beer,  the 
litre,  in  Barcelona  five  centimos,  in  Madrid  sixteen 
centimos;  sardines  (a  very  principal  food  among 
the  poorer  classes),  the  kilo,  in  Barcelona  eight 
centimos,  in  Madrid  the  monstrous  sum  of  twelve 
centimos  (a  halfpenny  per  pound  duty  on  the 
cheapest  fish  obtainable)  ;  rice,  per  hundred  kilos, 
in  Barcelona  fifty-six  centimos,  in  Madrid  four 
pesetas;  and  the  garbanzo  bean,  the  standard 
Spanish  article  of  food,  in  Barcelona  twenty.six 
centimos,  in  Madrid,  the  same  quantity,  seven  pesetas. 
We  should  add  to  these  figures  the  fact,  also  ad- 
duced bv  Senor  Ruiz  Jimenez,  that  the  carnage  of 
a   ton    of    wheat    from    Valladolid    to    Barcelona,    a 


