
Chapter VI. A Peep into Murcia.

From the palm-land of Murcia one passes over the unvarying, toneless
plains of La Mancha to the Sierra Morena mountains, and beyond them to
the daisy and buttercup-spread fields of Andalucia, which stretch away
to the south, and lose themselves in a wide perspective, bounded by
gold-shot undulating hills. The road runs down long slopes of flaming
poppies, and beside gardens of blooming wild roses, amid extremes of
perfectly-blended colour, to Bailen and Jaén, and the snow-crowned
Sierra Nevada which surrounds Granada. Bailen is famous only as being
the scene of the battle in which the French, under Duport, were defeated
by the Spanish forces led by Castaños. Jaén, or _Gien_, the Arab word
for fertility, is delightfully situated amid a jumble of mountains which
are covered with luxuriant vegetation. Under the Moors it was a petty
independent kingdom; but its ancient walls and its castle, which stands
like a sentinel commanding the gorge of the mountain approach from
Granada, have been almost entirely destroyed, and its own formidable
bulwarks are reduced to a single gate. Jaén, like Baeza, surrendered to
the victorious St. Ferdinand in the XIIIth century, and the two towns
conjointly form the see of a Bishop.

Chapter VII. Toledo and Cordova.

From Toledo I proceeded direct to Córdova, because, in my mind, the two
cities were linked together by the broad band of longevity, and I
desired to see them both in the same mood cycle. So, while the
atmosphere of Toledan greatness was still hot in my veins, I hastened
across the broad, bare, sandy plains of the celebrated Mancha--the
immortal theatre of the adventures of Don Quixote--past
Argasamilla--where Don Quixote was born, and died, and where his great
creator, Cervantes, was imprisoned for debt--across the Sierra Morena to
the land of the valley of the Guadalquiver--“the garden of Spain, the
Eden of the Arabs, the paradise of poets and painters”--to Andalucia.
Thenceforward there are no more rocks, but fields now studded, now
hidden by flowers--flowers, flowers all the way--carpet after carpet of
purple, gold, and snow-white flowers, poppies, daisies, lilies, wild
mushrooms, and ranunculuses. Then, as we are carried deeper into the
bosom of the south, we are met with grain and orange groves, olive
groves, and green hillsides, vineyards, and fruit trees. First a few
Moorish towers and many-coloured houses, then on the hills of the Sierra
Nevada clusters of villas and gardens, then a perfumed air scented with
rose leaves, an enchanted garden, and--Córdova.

Córdova is as different a place from Toledo as Monte Carlo is from
Manchester. Toledo, sombre, austere, overpowering in its impressive
solemnity; and Córdova, gay, vivacious, flashing its pervading whitewash
in the sunshine beneath the clearest sky in Europe. And yet Córdova is
one of the most ancient of cities; its record of all the races that have
fought for it, made it, died for it during twenty centuries, are visible
on every side. A thousand years ago it boasted upwards of a million
inhabitants, three hundred mosques, nine hundred baths, and six hundred
_fondas_. Its cathedral was formerly a mosque: before that it had been a
basilica: and it had commenced life as a Roman temple dedicated to
Janus. The Carthagenians styled the city the “Gem of the South.” Cæsar
half destroyed it, and slaughtered 28,000 of its inhabitants, because it
had sided with Pompey. Under the Goths its importance diminished; but it
became, under the Moors, the Athens of the West, and was the


successful rival of Bagdad and Damascus as a seat of learning, and the
centre of European civilisation. It was the birthplace of Seneca, Lucan,
Averroes, and Juan de Mena, the Chaucer of Spain; and here, in the
Church of San Nicolas, Gonzalo de Córdova, the great captain of Spain,
was baptised.

To-day Córdova is no more than an overgrown village in size and rank, a
village with open-air market-places, and winding, uneven streets.
Theophile Gautier wrote, in his delightful graphic style of the streets
of Córdova, that “they have a more thoroughly African appearance than
those of any other town in Spain. One threads one’s way between
interminable whitewashed walls, their scanty windows guarded by heavy
iron bars, over a pebbly pavement so rough that it is like the bed of a
torrent, littered with straw from the burdens of innumerable donkeys.”
These streets are traversed by happy, light-hearted people, who would
seem to have no memory of the past, and no thought for the morrow. But
the city contains a mosque which gives one a better idea of the power
and magnificence of the Moors than anything else in Spain, not excepting
even the Alhambra. This wondrous Arab temple--huge, wonderful,
fairy-like in its Eastern gorgeousness--with its thousand marble
columns, is unique in beauty as it is in curious detail. It is said that
these columns were brought, already shaped, from various centres of the
old civilised world--Carthage, Constantinople, Alexandria, Nîmes, and
Narbonne--while others came from the marble quarries of the Sierra
Morena, from Loja and Cadiz. Black, gray, dark green, and dull red in
colour, they stretch out on every side, and form a seemingly boundless
forest of marble pillars.

Concerning the impression made by this many-columned mosque, Gautier
says: “You appear to be walking about in a roofed forest rather than in
a building: whichever direction you turn to, your eye strays along rows
of columns, which cross each other, and lengthen out endlessly, like
marble trees that have risen spontaneously from the soil.” De Amicis has
written of it in similar terms: “Imagine a forest; fancy yourself in the
thickest portion of it, and that you can see nothing but trunks of
trees. So, in this mosque, on whichever side you look, the eye loses
itself among the columns. It is a forest of marble, whose confines one
cannot discover.” It stands, this dazzling Mezquita, in the centre of
the Court of Orange Trees, whose rows were planted to correspond with
the lines of the columns in the mosque. Above the dark, shining foliage
and flame-colour fruit rises the creamy delicate belfry-tower, rival of
Sevilla’s Giralda.

Some day, when “the wandering footsteps of my life” take me again to
Spain, I shall go to Córdova, and seek out this _Patio de los Naranjos_;
and among its pleasant fountains, and its blithesome, indolent
gossipers, I shall recall the impressions of my former visit. And, if
possible, I shall again visit the city in May. The guide-books warn the
traveller against going there in that month, when the annual fair is
held. I know that fair, as the suspicious Brother Goldfinch used to say,
with its booths erected under the trees, its band and its coloured
lanterns, its dear dates and its cigar lotteries, its gaiety, its gaudy
mantillas, its laughing, dark-eyed girls and gesticulating men, and its
culminating display of fireworks. I know it, and I can conceive no
reason why the guide-book makers should endeavour to
deprive other visitors of the enjoyment I got out of the innocent and
exhilarating experience.

Everything about Córdova--the streets, the squares, the houses, with
their _patios_--are small, lovely, mysterious, and Eastern. The
ground-work is white--white and smooth are the walls and the houses--but
the detail is a blaze of colours--roses, and oranges, and pinks forming
a colour scheme of Nature’s own designing. The youthful gaiety of the
town has overgrown its ancient might and sombreness, even as gay
flowers, burst from between the ancient stones of a ruined castle. It
has a charm that fills the heart with a sad pleasure; a mysterious spell
that one cannot resist. The cathedral is a fortress from without, but
within it is a palace of enchantment; the town is a citadel become a
pleasure garden; it is a museum of Roman and Arabian antiquities,
peopled with blithesome men and women. Within a mile or two of Córdova
once flourished Medina Az-zahra, which was one of the most marvellous
works of architecture, the most superb earthly palace, and the most
delicious garden in the world, and Zahira, built by the powerful
Almansur, the governor of the kingdom. Both these superb cities have
been destroyed, and not even the ruins are to be found.

Chapter IX. Granada and the Alhambra.

To the majority of travellers who visit Spain the Alhambra is Granada.
They visit the city in order to see the wonders of the old Moorish
palace, and unless they can spend many months in the neighbourhood they
have no time to see anything else. A celebrated French artist declared
that a man might worthily devote a life-time to the study of the
Alhambra. Washington Irving, who lived for six years in Spain, and
nearly the whole of it in Granada, complained, in 1829, that the
Alhambra had been so often described that little remained to be said.
Irving added to the literature of the subject his great and fascinating
work, and it might have been thought that with this book the last word
had been spoken. Hundreds of thousands of words in all languages have
been written since then about the Alhambra, and yet I am not deterred
from adding my few pages to the pile. There are many sights, like
moonlight on running water, or the dancing shadows of feathery trees on
a lawn, or the Hall of the Two Sisters in the Alhambra, which inspire
one with _cacoēthes scribendi_, and the mania is not to be resisted.

Granada, which has been called the city of running waters, is another
monument of Spain’s decayed glories. Under the Moors it boasted a
population of half-a-million inhabitants; to-day it has but little more
than a tenth of that number. There must have been more virility in the
district under the Romans, who ever congregated where wealth was
obtainable, and who reaped a rich harvest by washing the gold in the
sands of the Darro. To-day this vast source of revenue is practically neglected;
although, after the rains, a number of gold-fishers may be seen puddling
in its eddies. The beautiful and magnificent cathedral, the burial place
of the Catholic kings of mediæval Spain, the religious monuments--the
superb Cartoja, the Montesacro, containing the grottos of the martyrs,
the tomb of Gonzales di Córdova in the Church of San Geronimo, the
Convents of St. Dominie and of the Angels--and, above all, the Alhambra,
remain to link the city with its mighty past, but the only living
survival of its ancient activity is represented by the sand washers on
the banks of the Darro. Granada has gone to sleep. She is content to
doze in the midst of her beautiful gardens, encircled by her noble
mountains, rejoicing in the fruits that a fertile ground grows of its
own accord--content in her idleness and the variety of her beauty. If
she is reproved upon her condition, she replies with a yawn, and says,
as a witty Italian writer puts it: “I gave to Spain the painter Alonzo
Cano, the poet Luis de León, the historian Fernando de Castillo, the
sacred orator Luis de Granada, and the minister Martinez de la Rosas; I
have paid my debt; leave me in peace!”

So the visitor leaves sleepy Granada in peace in the hollow, and breasts
the hill, on the summit of which the Alhambra mounts guard over the
city. From the distance it presents, as do so many Oriental palaces, the
appearance of a fortress, and the approach is so planned that one comes
right under the shadow of its walls without obtaining another view of
it. A curve in the road brings one suddenly at the entrance to a grove,
the trees of which are so thickly planted that a man may scarcely pass
between them, and their mighty branches interlacing overhead defy the
sun to penetrate their foliage. An avenue pierces this park of verdure;
the shade is deep, but the air is soft and fragrant with the perfume of
flowers; and at the end we stand before a large square tower, dark
coloured and crowned with battlements, and entered by an arched door. It
is dowdy, commonplace, and unimpressive, but it is the Door of Justice,
the principal entrance to the Alhambra. But if the visitor feels a shock
of disappointment at this first close acquaintance with the world-famed
structure, it will certainly not be allayed when, having passed through
the gateway and ascended an embanked road, he is brought up before a
great ruined palace in the style of the Renaissance, beyond which stand
some miserable-looking little houses. The palace was erected by that
arch-vandal, Charles V., who, to his everlasting shame, planted a Gothic
Church in the middle of the Mosque at Córdova. The Alhambra has had its
full share of vicissitudes and desecrations. For a number of years it
was inhabited by smugglers and vagabonds, the French soldiers stabled
their horses there during their occupation, earthquakes have visited it,
and a gunpowder explosion destroyed some of the ceilings, but it
remained for Charles V. to outstrip the earthquake and the invading
armies in the work of ignorant spoilation. “But this,” one inquires,
aghast, “this rubbishly palace is not the Alhambra?” It is a relief to
be reassured that it is not; but the consolation is changed to amazement
when one learns that the Alhambra itself is contained among the wretched
hovels that lie beyond. But the suspense is nearly at an end; there is a
little door to be entered, a little courtyard to be crossed, and one is
in the marvellous apartment, which is at once a hall, a courtyard, and a
garden--the Court of the Myrtles. Two rows of Moorish arches, upheld by
light columns, stretch out on the right of the entrance one above the
other, while a tower rises on the opposite side; and in the centre,
extending right across the width of the _patio_, is a large rectangular
basin of water, which reflects, as in a mirror, the arches and
arabesques, and the superb mosaics which ornament the walls. The deep thrill of emotion and delighted surprise
that one experiences in gazing round this beautiful Eastern interior is
repeated again and again as one proceeds through the halls and courts of
this fairy palace. Moorish patios, with every variety of mosaic marble
columns, fountains, and flowers, may be seen in other cities of Spain,
but here are whole suites of courts, and gardens, and halls, vying with
each other in splendour, in regal magnificence and lavish expenditure;
while the situation of the palace is the most romantic and picturesque
in Europe.

The Tower of the Ambassadors, which contains two halls, one of which is
the great Hall of the Ambassadors, would alone earn for the Alhambra its
reputation for unsurpassed beauty. The walls and the ceilings are
covered with an enormous tracery of embroideries in the form of
garlands, roses, branches, and leaves, so blended as to make one
magnificent whole so delicate and intricate that the visitor could spend
hours in examining its inextricable network, and yet gain no more than a
vague impression of its detail. Gautier has compared these
ornamentations to “a kind of tapestry worked into the wall itself;” and
De Amicis, employing the same simile, writes of it: “The walls seem
woven like a cloth, rich as a brocade, transparent as lace, and veined
like a leaf.” The Hall of the Ambassadors is a spacious square apartment
lighted by nine arched windows, which, by reason of the thickness of the
walls, form nine alcoves, each supported by a little marble column and
surmounted by two exquisite small arches, surmounted in their turn by
two little arched windows. The views from these windows are entrancing;
and one turns from the handsome workmanship of the interior to the
magnificent landscape without in an ecstacy of sensuous pleasure.
The finest and most elegant piece of Mussulman architecture of the
Nazarite period. There is not a more magnificent and fantastic example,
in or out of Spain, on which the artistic genius of the Arabs might
pride itself; and certainly its builder, the famous architect Aben
Cencid, is worthy a place with the most noted architects of all time.
Transparent arcades, columns which have been grouped together in large
and small numbers in order to share the weight of the beautiful arches
and ceilings, seven fountains, two high ornaments in the form of
temples, which advance majestically to relieve the monotony of the
cloister, four golden cupolas which gleam in the rays of the sun, eleven
different forms of arches gaudily decorated, constitute, as Don Rafael
Contreras, who restored the Alhambra, says, a magical and delicious
whole, even though seven centuries have elapsed. In the centre of the
Court is a great marble basin, surrounded by a little paved canal, and
supported by twelve lions--lions fashioned in the strictest accordance
with the injunction of the Koran, which forbids its followers to make an
image of any living thing. A glance at these lions shows how faithfully
the sculptors of these ill-shaped, grotesque, ridiculous monstrosities observed the
tenets of their creed.

Perhaps the most beautiful apartment in the Alhambra is the hall of the
“Two Sisters,” which, in its exuberance of ornamentation, richness, and
variety of carving and manifold combination of every line that can
produce beauty and grace, is beyond description. Fergusson has described
it as “the most varied and elegant apartment in the whole palace.” The
proportions are so graceful, the colours so bright and gay, yet subdued
into such exquisite harmony that it soothes while it enchants the eye;
and every portion, down to the tiles, bears the stamp of such refined
taste and infinite invention, that one looks around with a sort of
despairing wonderment, unable either to classify the various objects
that challenge admiration on every side, or to carry off anything more
distinct than a dream-like recollection, in which every element of
decoration is blended in a bewildering chaos of beauty.

The ancient Moors made art a virtue, and bathing an art. They did not
bathe from a sense of duty, but because bathing was a luxury. Here
between the Hall of the Two Sisters and the Court of the Myrtles is the
_Sala de Reposo_, where the favourites of the Kings prepared themselves
for their bath, or rested themselves after it. This hall, which was
restored by Spanish artists on the ruins of the old one, is in keeping
with the rest of the palace. A fountain occupies the centre of the
apartment, alcoves are set in the multi-coloured walls, and the
atmosphere of the whole place is cool, fragrant, and delicious. Around
this hall are the little bath rooms, each bath formed out of a solid
slab of marble. The rooms are lit by means of holes in the wall in the
shape of stars and flowers, a device which admits the glow of the sun
without its rays. Soft light and perfumes, rose-coloured curtains and
music, contributed to the sensuous delights of the Sultanas’ ablutions.
They may not have been a particularly intelligent class of women, these
dainty, languid-eyed sultanas; but they must, as an American tourist
observed, have been a “wonderfully sweet and wholesome kind of female to
have about one.”

From the baths one proceeds to the _Tocador de la reina_ (the Queen’s
toilet), situated at the top of a tower from which one obtains a
magnificent view of the surrounding country. This royal boudoir is
perched on the edge of an abyss. It is open on all sides and on all
sides a spectacle of amazing beauty is spread out to the view.
Immediately below lies the city of Granada, the houses interspersed with
groups of trees and huge bunches of foliage which seem to fight with the
buildings for every yard of land that the hand of man has snatched from
nature. Beyond the city is an immense green plain, over which endless
rows of cypresses, pines, and oaks thread their ways amid groves of
oranges and a riot of flowers. The deep valley of the Darro is almost
hidden by the profusion of vegetation that runs right down to the
water’s edge, and the silver Genil shimmers amid the groves and gardens.
Beyond the plain are the hills, their green sides torn by the rugged
boulders that thrust their way through the trees; and to the south rise
the majestic snow-capped peaks of the Sierra Nevada, white and dazzling
in summer sunshine. The spectacle is one that can never fade from the
mind; the thrill it produces can never quite be lost.

The huge wall which surrounds the vast precincts of the Alhambra is
studded with towers which retain their original names. The _Torre de las
Infantas_ is one of the best preserved outwardly, and presents that
severity of outline which characterises the exterior of the palace, and
contrasts so strongly with the prodigal magnificence visible everywhere
in the interior. The Alhambra would be inexpressibly beautiful if it had
been

THE ALHAMBRA.

set up in the Arabian desert, or the wastes of Siberia; but situated as
it is in one of the most lovely spots on earth, it is as though the
Moors had discovered Paradise and made it habitable. I am told that
there is no time in the year when Granada is not beautiful; but beyond
question the best time to be there is when the song of the nightingale
and the fragrance of the orange blossom fill its groves with melody and
sweetness: when the eye, penetrating the foliage of its elm-planted
alameda, rests on the dazzling crest of Mulahacen with a sense of
refreshment, to which the contrast of green leaves and summer snow lends
an unwonted charm: when day is Elysium, and night a dream-land of
romance, illumined by the warm beams of a southern moon: when the
Alhambra assumes a garb of beauty to which, amid the glare of noon, its
courts and bowers are strangers. At that hour, as Irving tells us,
“Every rent and chasm of time, every mouldering tint and weather-stain,
disappears. The marble resumes its original whiteness: the long
colonnades brighten in the moonbeams: the halls are illumined with a
softened radiance, until the whole edifice reminds one of the enchanted
palace of some Arabian tale.”

Another American author, G. P. Lathrop, has acknowledged the supreme
spell of the Alhambra in a passage of remarkable descriptive power:
“When the Madonna’s lamp shone bright amid the engulfing shadows of the
Tower of Justice, while its upper half was cased in steely radiance, we
passed in by Charles’s Palace, where the moon, shining through the
roofless top, made a row of smaller moons in the circular upper windows
of the dark gray wall. In the Court of the Pond a low, gourd-like
umbellation at the north end sparkled in diamond lustre beneath the
quivering rays; while the whole Tower of Comares behind it, repeated
itself in the gray-green water at our feet, with a twinkle of stars
around its reversed summit--the coldness of the moonlight on the soft,
cream-coloured plaster in this warm, stilly air is peculiarly
impressive. As for sound, absolutely none is heard but that of dripping
water: nor did I ever walk through a profounder, more ghost-like silence
than that which eddied in Lindaraxa’s garden around the fountain, as it
mourned in silvery monotones of neglected grief. The moon-glare coming
through the lonely arches shaped gleaming cuirasses on the ground, or
struck the out-thrust branches of citron trees, and seemed to drip from
them again in a dazzle of crystals.... From the Queen’s Peinador we saw
long shadows from the towers thrown out over the sleeping city, which,
far below, caked together its squares of hammered silver, dusked over by
the deep gray of roofs that did not reflect the light. But within the
Hall of Ambassadors reigned a gloom like that of the grave. Gleams of
sharp radiance lay in the deep embrasures without penetrating; and at
one, the intricacies of open work above the arch were mapped sharp
figures of light on a space of jet-black floor. Another was filled
nearly to the top by the blue, weirdly-luminous image of a mountain
across the valley. Through all these openings I thought the spirit of
the departed would find entrance as easily as the footless night breeze.
I wonder if the people who lived in this labyrinth of art ever smiled?
In the palpitating dark, robed men and veiled women seemed to steal by
with a rustle no louder than that of their actual movement in life: silk
hangings hung floating from the walls: scented lamps shed their beams at moments through the obscurity, and I saw the gleam of enamelled
swords, the shine of bronze candlesticks, the blur of coloured vases in
the corners: the _kasidas_, of which poetry-loving monarchs turned the
pages. But in such a place I could not imagine laughter. I felt inclined
to prostrate myself in the darkness before I knew not what power of
bygone, yet ever present things--a half-tangible essence that expressed
only the solemnity of life and the presentiment of change.”

It were endless to describe all the various courts, balconies,
galleries, and baths contained within the circuit of the Alhambra. The
Mosque alone, with its exquisite niche where the Koran is deposited,
would long detain an archæologist. Yet that is but one Mosque; there are
the remains of three others to be seen. There are the ruins of the house
of the Cadi, the Water-tower, the Tower of the Prisoner, the Tower of
the Candil, a dozen other towers besides the house of Mondejar--what is
left of it--the military quarters, the gardens, the promenades, the--but
the list is endless, the sights are inexhaustible. One may live in the
Alhambra itself, as Washington Irving lived, and echo his plaint, “Oh,
that I had seen the Alhambra!”

In ancient times there was direct communication between the Alhambra and
the Generaliffe, the summer palace of the Moorish sovereigns, by the
Iron Door, and a narrow path running in front of it between two rows of
red walls. An exquisitely-carved door, inlaid with Dutch tiles, in the
lower garden of this place of recreation, leads into it. The
Generaliffe was built by order of Prince Omar, and the word has been
interpreted as meaning “Recreation, or Pleasure House,” and truly a more
delicious and charming spot, or one with more splendid views, cannot be
conceived. It is a small, white villa, with a terrace of gardens
stretching from the top of the mountain to the walls of the house, which
is encircled by thickets of laurel and myrtle. Flowers and myrtles,
arbours and high espaliers, surmounted by arches, abound on every side,
and the ears are soothed by the murmur of a hundred springs and
brooklets which gurgle and bubble amid the greenery and sparkle in every
open space. The noise of the distant city floats upwards with the sound
of a soft hum, and the air is laden with the perfume of roses and orange
blossoms.

The Cathedral of Granada is a splendid pile, but I did not inspect it
during my visit. There is a Cathedral in every Spanish city one enters,
but there is only one Alhambra in the world. Yet here are the tombs of
Ferdinand and Isabella, here is the casket in which Isabella sent her
jewels to the pawnbroker--the jewels that were disposed of in order to
furnish Christopher Columbus with the money for the arming of the ships
in which he sailed to discover the New World.

Close to the Cathedral there is a bazaar, Arabian in form and
appearance, which was re-decorated in 1844 owing to the fire which
occurred there the previous year. It is said that Alcaiceria signifies
the house or place of Cæsar; and, according to Marmol, it is the place
where public and private merchandise was stored according to the custom
in Eastern towns. Before the fire this Alcaiceria preserved all its old
characteristics, and was a great deal narrower than it is now, the shops
being so small that the shopman had to get on the counter or outside it,
as there was no room behind it. At present the Arab decoration is too artificial, and a strange incongruousness exists between the beautiful Arab columns and the
angular horse-shoe arches covered with show-bills and notices
advertising various articles and professional services of all kinds.

To the visitor to Spain, who has already seen Seville and Toledo and
Cuenca, the city of Granada is not greatly impressive, or even
deliberately interesting. The older streets are tortuous, narrow and
noisy; but the modern part is as regular and unimaginative as only a
modern city can be, with wide thoroughfares, spacious squares, and
excellent pavements. This monotony is broken by the famous _Alameda_,
which, with its rows of immense trees whose foliage meets and interlaces
overhead, its handsome fountains, its garden filled with roses, myrtle
and jessamine, and its glimpses of the snowy Sierra Nevada from amid the
tropical vegetation, makes it one of the finest and most picturesque
promenades in Spain. During the daytime the Alameda is deserted, but in
the evening it is crowded with a laughing, bustling multitude; and, in
the habit of keeping late hours, the people of Granada are every bit as
fashionable as those of Madrid or Seville. Beggars there are--and where
are they not in this land of mendicancy?--ordinary beggars and
gipsies--the most persistent and irrepressible of beggars.

Where do they all come from, these hungry-looking, scowling, emaciated
men and women, and these wretched, withered, whining children? From the
_Albaycin_, the gipsy quarters on the face of the hill. The road is
steep, and the streets are narrow, the houses dilapidated and unsavoury.
The higher one climbs, the more miserable become the houses, the more
wretched and ragged the people that sleep in the doorways or shuffle
about the streets. Yet this is the Belgravia of the _Albaycin_. Further
still, and the path grows so rugged and narrow, so full of boulders and
holes, that it seems more like a cutting made by a mountain torrent than
a street, and the dwellings are no better than hovels. We are miles from
Spain, in an African village, and an evil specimen at that. The
buildings are so many ruins with tiny doors--you pass through the
doorway and find yourself in the courtyard of an Arabian house,
surrounded by graceful, slender columns, surmounted by very light
arches, and bearing those indescribable traceries which are the glory
and the bewilderment of the Alhambra. One gazes from the bits of
arabesqued walls to the morose wrinkled faces; from the delicate columns
to the rags that serve to but half-clothe the women, and one’s mind
refuses, or is incapable of reconciling these incongruities. The
conditions of the houses and the people continue to grow more malodorous
and repulsive as one proceeds; but if the visitor has a mind (and
stomach) for high-class slumming, there is yet more to see.

For beyond the residential area, where hovels serve as dwelling-places,
we come to the district of the cave-dwellers. The caves are dug in the
earth in the side of the hills; caves with a mud wall in front, with holes to admit the light, and cracks to serve as a means of ingress and exit for the people. They are mere dens, fit only for wild beasts; and the gitanos that swarm in them are little
better than savages. Their numbers are unobtainable; their laws, if they
have any, are unknown to the statute of any country. No one shall say
how they exist, or what they exist upon. The police dare not penetrate their fastnesses;
the tax-collector never troubles them; nor doctor nor priest visits
them. “Manners none, customs nasty” is the only description that can be
applied to them. One reaches the gates of the gipsy quarter, but few
people have any desire to go further. No sooner is the intruder espied
from afar than the whole mountain-side vomits forth its pack of
beggars--men, women and children--the blind, the lame and the halt, the
diseased and the decrepit, all filthy, and all shouting for alms, and
thrusting out their hungry palms. It is not dignified, I admit, but, in
the circumstances, it is advisable to button up your dignity, with your
other valuables, and take to your heels. Take the advice that Jack
Bunsby gave to Captain Cuttle, when he was in his matrimonial fix, and
bolt.

It is told of one of the gitani, to whom a man child was born, that he
brought the baby to a priest in Granada, and asked that it might be
christened. The old padre was delighted to find such a sign of awakening
to moral consciousness in one of the outlawed people, and willingly
acquiesced.

“And what do you wish to call your son?” he asked.

“Tiger!” promptly responded the proud father.

“Tiger?” protested the priest. “But you cannot name a child after a wild
beast.”

“That is his name,” persisted the father. “The Pope, he is called lion
(Leo), my son shall be tiger.”

And “Tiger” he was duly christened.


Chapter X. Seville.


There is an old German saying: “_Wein Gott lieb hat, dem giebt er ein
Haus in Sevilla_,” which may be translated, “He whom God loves has a
house in Seville.” Truly, there are few fairer, gayer, and more wholly
desirable places of abode in Europe. It is at once a seaport town,
situated on the banks of the Guadalquiver (“the great river”),
fifty-four miles from the sea, and the centre of an exuberantly fertile
district which produces olives, grapes, oranges, cork, and grain in
perfection. The Sevillians proudly call their country “La Tierra de
Maria Santisima,” of which Byron wrote:

              “ ...All sunny land
    Of love! When I forget you, may I fail
    To--say my prayers!”

The sunshine reflected from the walls and the houses darts through the
labyrinth of narrow streets, peers into fairy-like _patios_, and floods
the orange trees, palms, and acacias that grow in every open space and
square of the city. Here is all gaiety, and mirth, and roses which
blossom all the year round in a climate which is claimed to be one of
the most delightful in Europe. And the sun is in the blood of the
people. They pursue pleasure as the serious business of life; bustle,
love, and laughter fill their days and nights, and the air is ever abuz
with soft sounds. I suppose that the English temperament, which is more
like that of the Catalonians, would in time grow weary of the buoyant,
light-hearted Andalusian nature, and the English resident in Seville
would find himself complaining that he had

                “ ... breathed too long awhile,
    Soft airs and perfumes, listened to soft sounds,
    And journeyed in soft paths beneath soft skies.”

But my visits to Seville have never been so far protracted as to afford
me the opportunity of putting this surmise to the test. My impressions
of the city are snapshots rather than etchings; they are slightly
blurred and indistinct, but wholly delightful to reflect upon. Seville,
like Venice and Rome, is a place that one goes to with one’s mind full
of preconceived notions--unconsciously primed for disappointment and the
disillusionment of reality. Yet I have never met anyone who confessed to
being disappointed with Seville. After the modernity of Madrid, the
prosperous and business-like alertness of Barcelona, and the sombre
mediævalism of Toledo, the exhilarating sense of enjoyment that
permeates the air of this “all sunny land of love” inspires one with a
sympathy that makes the criticisms of the Madrileños seem as ill-natured
slanders. Are these bright, laughing people, these spruce, graceful men,
and entrancing women, vain, false, changeable, and given to gossip?
Perish the thought! True, that is the opinion held in the capital; the
Sevillians only half resenting the allegations, which they ascribe to
jealousy. And their criticisms of the bodies, minds, and manners of the
Madrileños are unprintable. In Madrid you hear, “The Sevillians! Ah,
they can do nothing but make love!” And in Seville they declare that the
Madrileños can make nothing--but mistakes.

But whatever the shortcomings of Seville may be, no town in the south of
Spain receives more visitors. All sorts of people go there, with all
sorts of motives. The artist goes to fill his portfolio with the
picturesque forms and showy costumes of Majo and Maja. The lover of
painting makes a pilgrimage there to see Murillo in all his glory. The
seasons of the Church--Christmas, Holy Week, and Easter--attract
thousands from

devotion or curiosity, the religious ceremonies of the place being of
peculiar interest, and unrivalled, except in Rome. And not even in the
Eternal City itself shall you see boys dancing before the high altar.
This curious survival of a very ancient custom takes place at the
festival of Corpus Christi--the _corps de ballet_, if one may so term it
without offence, consisting of two rows of boys, from eight to ten years
old, dressed like Spanish cavaliers of the mediæval age, with plumed
hats and

white stockings. The dance they execute to the low music of violins is
simple, dignified, and exceedingly graceful. When they break out all
together into a lovely and harmonious chant, the effect upon the
spectator is electrical; and even the use of the castanets does not rob
the ceremony of its impressiveness. I am told that some two hundred
years ago an Archbishop of Seville desired to suppress this dance, and
the tumult that ensued among the people and the canons of the cathedral
echoed even to Rome. The Pope was naturally curious to see the dance,
and the boys were taken to Rome to dance and sing before his holiness.
The Pope laughed, and did not express any disapproval; but, wishing to
satisfy the canons without displeasing the Archbishop, decreed that the
boys should dance until the clothes they had on were worn out, after
which the ceremony might be considered as abolished. In two centuries
these clothes are still in a state of excellent repair; and as only one
part of the boys’ costumes are renewed at a time, they bid fair to last
for ever.

Seville, which is always gay, and Spanish, and fascinating to the
receptive visitor, is at its best at this festival of Corpus Christi.
For days beforehand preparations are in progress, streets are swept,
awnings are put up over all the streets and squares along which the
procession is to pass, flowers are banked to make a background, chairs
are placed in every available corner, and in the cathedral the columns
are draped in gorgeous velvet cloths. On the day itself, thousands flock
into Seville from the country and the neighbouring towns. The procession
itself would appear a poor and ineffective spectacle to people who saw
Alfonso XIII. ride from the Palacio Real to the Plaza de Toros in May
last year, or Edward VII. pass from Westminster Abbey to Buckingham
Palace. But the line of route is a sight to remember. Along it, on
either side, one can observe the Andalusians in all their glory. As a
beauty show, it is a display that in my experience has no equal. Every
window and every balcony contains a picture of feminine loveliness.
Every individual beauty composing it is a subject for the painter’s
brush. Hardly less attractive is the sight of the soldiers lining the
route, either on foot or mounted on Andalusian steeds, proud and
graceful as their riders, and beautiful as the señoritas, who gaze upon them with
their big, black, lustrous eyes.

The streets of Seville, in comparison with those of Toledo or Córdova,
are almost modern and relatively spacious. The most interesting of them
all is the _Calle de Sierpes_, which no wagon is allowed to enter, and
which is lined with cafés, clubhouses, and splendid shops. Many of the
latter are semi-Moorish, and although you do not see a turbanned
Mohammedan squatting in a small booth open to the street, you do see no
end of shops which are practically in the street, the whole front wall
(consisting of doors) being removed in the daytime. I have wandered for
hours through the dazzling white streets, sniffing the diffused odour of
oranges, and watching the handsome and picturesque peasantry as they
revel through life. To the Englishman, no city in Spain presents more
novel sights and historic contrasts. Having been successively a
Phœnician, Greek, Roman, Gothic, Moorish, and Catholic city, it
preserves traces and monuments of almost all these dynasties. At the
suberb, Italica, the birthplace of three Roman emperors, the ruins of an
ancient amphitheatre, with its various subterranean divisions for the
gladiators and the wild beasts that appeared therein, may still be seen.
Seville itself is Moorish in the arrangement of the streets and houses,
and the Alcázar is the best preserved specimen of Moorish architecture
in Spain. Adjoining it is the Christian Cathedral. In the streets the
mediæval donkey grazes the modern tram-car. At the hotel sits an
Englishman in a Moorish _patio_ reading the latest number of the
_Times_.

These Moorish _patios_ are, of all the sights in Seville, the most
interesting. One finds them at Malaga and Granada, at Córdova and
Toledo, but one must come to Seville to see these pleasant courtyards at
their best. Here are _patios_ of all sizes and grades of splendour, but
always _patios_. In the finest of these square courtyards the floor is
of marble, and the walls are inlaid with elegant mosaic. In the centre
is a flower plot, or a fountain surrounded with flowers or statuary.
Marble columns on each side support the inside projection of the upper
story, which is sometimes provided with windows, while the _patio_
itself is open above to the sky at night, and covered during the daytime
with an awning. To me these sweet shady spots were a source of
increasing delight. Anything more exquisite after its kind--more
perfectly ordered, delicately arranged, and beautifully kept up, than
the court of a Sevillian gentleman’s residence, I have never seen; and
the poorer classes follow suit with marvellous success and unanimity.
There is no great outer door, as at Toledo, but cunningly-wrought and
fairy-like iron gates, which only serve to set off an enticing picture
of marble pavement, colonnade, and fountain, in a framing of palmitos,
bananas, and lemon-trees, with here and there a coquettishly-perched
cage of singing birds. The temptation to pry into these dainty interiors
was irresistible.

I confess that I had been two days in Seville before I explored the
cathedral. For one thing, there was so much to see all around that I had
no temptation to make a definite excursion to any particular point of
interest; and as somebody once remarked about a five-act tragedy, it was
so easy not to go to the cathedral. Moreover, I had seen cathedrals in
every town that I had visited in Spain, and I was surfeited of them. I had stood in
admiration before the magnificent pile, and gazed in wonderment at the
famous rose-coloured Giralda; but it was not until the third day of my
visit that I determined to “do” the cathedral. It has been said “there
is not a more solemn and beautiful temple in the world than the great cathedral at Seville.”
It is so grand and solemn as to strike the visitor with amazement and
awe. From the gay, colour-slashed streets of the city to the grand
interior is but a step, but the effect is overwhelming. The sudden
transition from the dazzling sunshine of the outer air produces a
sensation of darkness; all is confused and indistinct; while the eye,
instinctively seeking relief, looks upward to the clerestory, where,
through the small windows, a feeble ray of daylight comes struggling in.
By degrees, the magnificent proportions of the building reveal
themselves, and their majestic grandeur almost oppresses the mind. Even
Furguson allows Seville Cathedral to be “so grand, so spacious, and so
richly furnished that it is impossible to criticise when the result is
so splendid and imposing.” How, indeed, can one criticise a building
whose decorations consist of paintings by Murillo, Juan Valdes Leal,
Morales, Zurburan, Roelas, and Vargas, sculptures by Montanes and Alonso
Cano, and whose painted glass, wood-carving, and embroidery, mural
decoration, and metal work are the finest examples of the finest date in
every branch of each art?

“The first view of the interior,” says Lomas, “is one of the supreme
moments of a life-time. The glory and majesty of it are almost terrible.
No other building, surely, is so fortunate as this in what may be called
its presence. Nave, side aisles, and lateral chapels, all of singularly
happy proportions, a vista of massive and yet graceful columns, a
rightly dim religious light, gloriously rich stained glass, and an
all-prevailing notion of venerable age--such is the sum of one’s first
impressions.”

Gautier’s and De Amicis’ comparison of the interior of the mosque at
Córdova to a marble forest, is in reality much more applicable to the
interior of the Seville Cathedral. As one writer has said: “Vast height,
dim light, gloom, and awe are


the characteristics of a forest primeval; and all these, absent in
Córdova, are to be found in the Cathedral of Seville. But if this
cathedral be compared to a petrified forest, it must be to a forest of
giant trees. There is something supremely massive, colossal, mammoth, in
the huge, high pillars of this building--something which makes one
wonder, as do the Pyramids of Egypt, that human might should have
sufficed to place these monstrous stones in an upright position, and in
symmetrical rows. The Córdovan pillars are mere walking sticks in
comparison, and the ceiling which they support only one quarter as high
as that in the Seville Cathedral, which is the largest--and its tower
the highest--in Spain. So vast is its interior space that,
notwithstanding its ninety-three windows, a dim, mysterious twilight
pervades every part all day long.” Yet, although Seville is the warmest
and sunniest place in Spain, and this cathedral its coolest spot, the
flock of worshippers is very small indeed. The number of priests who
officiate at the thirty chapels and eighty-two altars, have been reduced
from 133 to 100; but it seems as if to-day one quarter that number would
suffice for all needful purposes.

The Alcázar, built on the ruins of the Roman Prætorium, was, in the
design of its creators, the principal feature in the scheme of the
city’s fortification. It was also the palace of the Moorish Kings, and
is to-day the residence of the Spanish sovereign; but the exterior, with
its masses of bare masonry and its embattled towers, still preserves
the character of a mediæval castle. The Alcázar is in an excellent state
of preservation, and its charms are bewildering; while its associations
with the crisores and amours of three races of kings lend it an historic
interest. The ornamentation of the rooms is superbly beautiful, and the
variety of designs and colours, the gold and the gems, with which the
walls are decorated, produce in the brain a feeling of tiredness and
confusion. All that is marvellous in complicated design, all that is
rich and exquisite in tone and material, all that genius and workmanship
is capable of, has been enlisted in the beautifying of this palace of
delight. One gazes from the friezes to the fairy-like columns, from the
capricious arches to the bejewelled ceilings, from the secret doors to
the lovely little windows, and in the mysterious gloom one feels again
the thrill of exaltation and amazement that only love, or wine, or the
spectacle of the sublime and the mysterious can beget. The Alcázar,
taken in conjunction with its history, is a dose of artistic and
imaginative intoxication that no living soul shall resist.

Seville is instinct of Bartolomé Esteban Murillo. Here is the house in
which he lived, and the house in which he died: here in the picture
gallery are over a score of his paintings, and here are the originals of
the beggar-boys, which are admitted to be beyond praise. Here, too, in
the centre of the _Plaza del Museo_, is the statue of the painter that
was erected in 1866.

Everybody who visits Seville goes to the _La Fabrica de Tabacos_; and
travellers who delight in the picturesque should not omit to make a call
at _El Corral del Conde_, where the washerwomen follow their avocation.
The crowd, the clatter of female tongues, the groupings, the attitudes,
the draperies, and the babble of children, make up a scene which would
move Mr. Beerbohm Tree to enthusiasm. The tobacco factory is, of course,
an institution, and the women employed there are made famous by the
opera of “Carmen.” The building is an enormous quadrangular edifice, and
has 28 interior _patios_; and some 5,000 women and girls are engaged in
the manufacture of cigars and cigarettes. The stories of the beauty and
diablerie of these ladies that had been told me were strangely
conflicting. From some I had gathered that they were a collection of
alluring sultanas; while others had described them as plain, coarse, and
unattractive. But I found them to be very much as I expected. They were
not all Carmens, but the majority of them were something more than
interesting, and many were downright beautiful. The architecture of the
building makes accommodation for the workers in three vast rooms, and
each room is sub-divided into three by three rows of pilasters. The
girls work in dishabille, and silence is _not_ imposed. In order to
obtain the maximum measure of freedom, they discard their finery, which
is suspended on the walls, and forms an amazing mass of black and red,
slashed with vivid streaks of white, purple, and yellow. A fancy dress
warehouse could not present a braver display of colour, nor a _corps de
ballet_ at rehearsal a sartorial exhibition of more engaging scantiness.
The whole place is alive with colours and with sound. There is no noise
but a kind of incessant buzzing. If these girls were English, their
voices would produce a clatter; but the soft, singing accents of
Andalusia, even when several hundred girls are talking altogether,
sound harmonious and soothing. The amount of pay earned varies according
to the capacity and industry of the workers, and the majority appear to
be both busy and skilful. Some there are that look dull and sleepy;
others, as we enter, are asleep with their heads pillowed on their arms,
that are crossed on the table, but they are wakened by a nudge or a
whisper; and even the most absorbed labourer finds time to give us a
glance as we pass. It is said that the morality of the tobacco workers
is a trifle loose--babies are numerous in _la Fabrica de Tabacos_. A
friend who was with me remarked their presence to the manager: “There
would seem to be more babies here than married women,” he said. “It is
possible,” was the reply, “some married women are blessed with more than
one.” We looked at our guide with questioning eyes, but he did not so
much as smile.
Immediately around Seville are green gardens and vineyards, and olive
and orange orchards, and beyond them the level, marshy country with
grass in plenty, in which are bred flocks of sheep, herds of cattle and
horses, and mosquitoes of singular malignity. No trees arrest the eye,
nothing but green, flat plains, traversed by roads bordered by hedgerows
of prickly pear surmounted with their yellow flowers--substantial,
business-like hedges that do not require the artificial embellishment of
barbed wire or spikes to make them deadly to would-be trespassers. Such
hedges would keep out an army--unless of course it be an army composed
of beggars, whom no fortification, natural or created, would keep out. There are beggars everywhere; sick beggars, and sorry beggars, sad beggars, smiling beggars, blind beggars, beastly beggars, old beggars, and baby beggars. There is no escaping them. 
They follow you along the roads, crawl out in front of you from the hedges, cluster
around you if you stop to take a momentary observation. _Toujours_
beggars! You drive up to your hotel--there is a small crowd of them
awaiting you. If you hesitate a moment in handing the fare to the
driver, they hem you in on every side, whining for “Señor, una limosnita
por el amor de Diós” (“A little alms, sir, for the love of God”). A tiny
boy of some seven summers explains with dignity that he is not begging
for himself--he would scorn to beg for himself--but it is for the little
señorita, and he points to a tiny girl of four who looks pleading up at
you out of great eyes. A blind man at your elbow commences to scrape out
the ghost of a tune on a wretched fiddle, and a filthy segment of
humanity thrusts the stump of an amputated arm before your face. It is
horrible to the visitor; it is equally repulsive to the Spaniard. The
Englishman feels sick and angry: the Spaniard feels sick and sorry. The
former bolts into the shelter of his hotel with a malediction between
his teeth, the latter thrusts his hand into his pocket instinctively and
gives.

A large number of the beggars are children, who are brought up to
mendicity as a profession, and they never desert it. They beg, as do
their similars in Naples, in Constantinople, or in Colombo, for their
fathers and mothers and for the love of God. They are so importunate, so
bright, and, in many cases, so pretty that they reap a living wage even
from the British visitors. One gets to love these Spanish children--it
is impossible to resist them. Their childish dignity and politeness, and
their eagerness to be of assistance if the opportunity presents itself,
is delightful. I remember well a little chap we encountered at the
railway station at Chinchilla, where, for reasons best known to the
railway officials, we had to change trains in the middle of the night.
He fastened on to us directly we dismounted from the train, and desired
to be made of some service. He followed us into the waiting room, and
suggested that we should commission him to notify us when our train was
due. We charged him with this mission, and so great was his zeal in the
discharge of it that he had us out again upon the platform, where we
stood, exposed to the rain and the cold night air, for a quarter of an
hour before the train arrived. He was very pleased with himself; and
when, after bundling our traps into a compartment, he was rewarded with
a whole peseta, his gratification was unbounded. He bit the piece
between his teeth, and then, approaching a porter who stood near with a
lamp in one hand and an open umbrella in the other, he got him to cast
the light of his lantern upon it. Then he took another bite at the
coin--bad money is not so rare in Spain as it is in this country--and
came back to us, and his face was one expansive smile. He climbed up to
the carriage window, as we supposed, with Feste’s importunation in his
mind: “But that it would be double dealing, sir, I would you could make
it another.” But he had only come to place himself at our entire
disposal. Were we wanting anything, he would fetch it; did we wish to
send letters, or telegrams, or messages, he would carry them. I sent him
to get me another pillow, and on his return gave him half a peseta. His
delight was humorous. He desired that God would treat me according to my
great deservings, that my journey would be a safe and comfortable one,
and that my days might be many. The bow he gave me as the train steamed
out of the station was quite worth one and a-half pesetas.

Spanish trains are invariably slow, and, as often as not, they are
overcrowded. For some reason or other, which I have failed to plomb, the
so-called fast trains travel at night, and the times are so arranged
that one generally has to leave a place and arrive at one’s destination
at about two o’clock in the morning. The Spaniard is a lover of the
night, not from poetical or sentimental motives, but because it is only
before sun-up and after sun-down that one gets a sufficiency of the
much-longed-for shade. Shade is to the Spaniard what gold is to the Jew,
or English origin is to the American. Hence the Spaniard rises early and
gets through as much work as he can before the heat of the day sets in;
hence, also, he makes his siesta as long as he can; and, consequently,
he is able and ready to pursue his business or his pleasure far into the
night. It is in the cool of the evening in Seville that one sees the
promenades full, the highways alive with splendid Andalusian
horses--when one sees in one week of evenings more feminine beauty than
can be seen anywhere else in a month.

But to return to the railways, and the subject brings to mind the
reflections and the prophecy indulged in by Ford when the undertaking
was in contemplation:--“Certainly if the rail can be laid down in Spain
by the gold and science of England, the gift like that of steam will be
worthy of the Ocean’s Queen, and one of the world’s real leaders of
civilisation: and what a change will then come over the spirit of the
Peninsula! how the siestas of torpid man vegetation will be disturbed by
the shrill whistle and panting snort of the monster engine! how the
seals of this long, hermetically-shut-up land will be broken! how the
cloistered obscure and dreams of treasures in Heaven will be enlightened
by the flashing fire-demon of the wide-awake money worshipper! what owls
will be vexed, what bats disost, what drones, mules, and asses will be
scared, run over and annihilated! Those who love Spain, and pray, like
the author, daily for her prosperity, must indeed hope to see this
‘network of rails’ concluded, but will take special care at the same time not to invest one farthing in the imposing
speculation.”

Richard Ford, who wrote the foregoing in 1846, was not far out in his
calculations. Although the network of rails is not yet complete, the
railroad now connects most of the principal cities of Spain, and its
introduction has been a blessing to the country. But its cost has been
enormous. French capital has been, for the most part, sunk in the
venture; and those who followed Ford’s advice, with respect to investing
their money in it, have little to complain of. The speed, which seldom
exceeds twenty miles an hour, and averages not more than ten miles, is
regulated by law, and the management of the entire system might with
advantage be reorganised. But the delays at junction stations, the
slowness of the pace, and the other inconveniences, which the traveller
accustomed to British or American railroads finds so great a trial on
his patience, are not necessarily the result of bad management. They are
rather the effects of a combination of natural causes and temperamental
prejudices. The danger incurred by the starting of rails exposed to the
full heat of the sun on sandy plains and the menace of mountain torrents
govern, to an extent, the regulation as to speed. Moreover, this is
always to be borne in mind, that the railways are primarily for the
convenience of the Spanish people, and the Spaniards are never in a
hurry. But that there is not a little red-tape about the whole thing
cannot be denied.

A short time ago I was travelling from Valencia to Barcelona by the East
Coast Railway. Rain had been falling for a week, and some doubt was
expressed as to the train being able to complete the journey. Time was
precious just then, and the only alternative route was _via_ Madrid,
which would be very much the same as going from London to Hull _via_
Cardiff. “We may be delayed,” my companion admitted, “I was twenty-four
hours late on the same journey once before, but we shall get through. We
will start, in any case--at the worst it is only an excursion.” So we
started, and the rain continued. We were within sight of Murviedro, or
Saguntum as it was known by the Romans, when the train stopped, and we
were informed that something had happened to the line just ahead of us.
Further information told of a rushing torrent which had carried away a
seven-arch bridge, and that further progress was impossible. Then a
German commercial traveller, who was in our carriage, published his
opinion aloud upon the railway system, the officials, and everything
connected with “this damned country.” He compared Spain with Germany,
and his eloquence was up to the high water mark of his indignation. He
damned everything in English, and the bridge in particular. He said that
in Germany they would have ferried the passengers over the stream,
placed them in another train which would have been awaiting on the other
side, and not lost more than an hour by the accident.

As our wait was likely to be somewhat lengthy, we decided to walk along
the rails and inspect the scene of the breakdown for ourselves, and our
German critic was surprised to find that the “stream” he had wished to
be ferried over was a mad, boiling torrent in which no boat--not even a
boat “made in Germany”--could have lived for thirty seconds. We wandered
back and interviewed the engine-driver, the guard, and the other train
officials. We were all agreed that the only thing to be done was for the
train to return to Valencia. But the engine-driver would not act without
instructions--on that point he was adamant. He wired to Barcelona, and
he wired also to Madrid, explaining the situation, and requesting
permission to return the way he had come. After four hours’ delay the
necessary orders arrived, and we looked for an immediate start on the
backward journey. But this the officials could not think of. We could not return
in that slapdash fashion--we were the 8.30 from Valencia to Barcelona,
and if we went bundling back into Valencia like an old tramp steamer
that had sprung a leak, the entire railway system of the country would
be thrown into confusion. The point was debated warmly, but without
haste; and, eventually, the engine-driver, who had been consulting his
time-table, discovered that if we waited a further couple of hours we
should be able to re-enter Valencia with our dignity unimpaired as the
4.47 from Barcelona. Which we did, and nobody but the German appeared to
see anything foolish or unmethodical in this solution of the difficulty.
“You do not find the arrangement incongruous?” asked my companion, for
the German was still swearing. I smiled. “For three months I was a
season ticket holder on a certain South of England railway,” I
explained.

But if the railway system of Spain has its drawbacks, it is the
embodiment of luxury and speed compared with the old-fashioned posting
facilities for those who are in a hurry. If time is no object, and the
weather is fine, there is no pleasanter way of seeing the country. The
engine is of course driving the mule team further and further from the
large cities, but the delights of posting are not yet banished from the
Peninsula. In the northern provinces posting is still very general, and
in many parts it is excellent. The oaths of the drivers would,
doubtless, shock the unaccustomed ear that was sufficiently versed in
the jargon of the road to understand it, but the pace leaves nothing to
be desired. The Spaniard is a born muleteer; and, as I have invariably
found him, a good fellow. His vocabulary of objurations is varied and
peculiar, and he keeps it in first-class working order by continual
practice. The customs of the road are like the laws of the Medes and
Persians in their unalterableness. You may improve the diligence off
the road, but while it remains on it, it cannot be improved. A French
minister described the stage as a “clumsy, inconvenient carriage drawn
by mules which have no other spur or rein than the voice of their
guides. On seeing them harnessed together and to the shafts merely by
cords, and observing them traversing as it were at random the winding
and sometimes unfrequented roads of the Peninsula, the traveller at
first conceives himself as deriving all his dependence for safety from
the care and kindness of Providence: but on the slightest appearance of
danger, a simple and short exclamation from the _mayoral_ restrains and
directs these tractable animals.”

The foregoing, which might have been written yesterday, was, as a matter
of fact, indicted a hundred years ago. It is evident that the worthy
French minister did not understand the purport of those “simple and
short” exclamations, and I am inclined to think, from his remarks upon
the tractability of the animals, that he must have been asleep when the
start was made. For the mules appear to entertain a rooted and
conscientious objection to starting, and the scene is diverting. All the
skill and patience and language of the _mayoral_, and the united efforts
of ostlers, helpers, and all the hangers-on of a posthouse are required
to persuade them to take the first step. For several minutes one’s ears
are assailed with a perfect tornado of shouts, and orders, imprecations,
and deprecations; which, beginning with “Anda!” (Go) “Anda!” “Anda!”
invariably end, when breath and patience are exhausted, in an
abbreviated form of “Da! Da! Da!” and then, after a good deal of
kicking, the team starts suddenly across the road or over a heap of
stones, with an occasional leg over the traces, at a pace that threatens
to bring the carriage and its cargo to inevitable grief. Only a Spanish
muleteer could bring this riotous team into order, and pilot them with such patience until they drop into a more moderate pace. Ford
has described those exciting starts, and the motion of the “dilly,” as
away it goes, “pitching over ruts deep as routing prejudices, with its
pole dipping and rising like a ship in a rolling sea.”

It goes without saying that the observant Ford did not fail to note the
vituperative supremacy of the Spanish muleteer. “Their language,” he
tells us, “is limited only by the extent of their anatomical,
geographical, astronomical, and religious knowledge: it is so
plentifully bestowed on their animals--‘un muletier a ce jeu vaut trois
rois’--that oaths and imprecations seem to be considered as the only
language a mute creation can comprehend: and as actions are generally
suited to the words, the combination is remarkably effective.... The
Spanish oath is used as a verb, as a substantive, as an adjective, just
as it suits the grammar or the wrath of the utterer.” But why, the
reader may ask, does the _mayoral_ swear to this degree, or with this
fluency? Unless it is a part of his habit, I cannot answer. It is told
that a traveller once asked the same question, and received a similar
reply. The _mayoral_ had uttered an oath of such peculiar force and
aptness that a fellow traveller remarked upon it with good humoured
appreciation: “That’s one on the devil!” “But why?” queried the seeker
for information, “why does he swear so?” The Spaniard stared in
astonishment. “Because he is the _mayoral_!” was all he said.

Chapter XI. In Southern Andalusia.


Idle as a “painted ship upon a painted ocean,” fair Cadiz sleeps beneath
her white mantle and dreams of the succeeding storms that she has
endured since Hercules brought her into being eleven hundred years
before the advent of the Messiah. For century after century Cadiz played
her important part in the world--the world that ended at her glistening
shores. Yet it might, from external evidence, have been built yesterday,
and whitewashed this morning. But beneath that white covering lies the
rust of three thousand years. The natives compare their spotless city to
a silver dish; Fernan Caballero describes it as an ivory model set in
emeralds. It is an architectural symbol of purity. Extreme neatness and
scrupulous cleanliness are its leading characteristics--white is its
prevailing and only colour. The Venice of Spain, so far as my
opportunities of making a comparison extends, is decidedly the best-kept
city in the Peninsula. The impression is heightened by the ever-ready
brush of the whitewasher, which keeps the houses and walls in the most
immaculate condition.

Although Cadiz is slowly recovering from the decadence into which it was
sunk for so long, there is small activity either of commerce, trade, or
manufacture to support its seventy thousand inhabitants; and suitable
docks have yet to be constructed to enable it to take the commercial
rank to which its situation entitles it. Its resemblance to Venice is
remarkable. Lying as it does seven miles at sea, the inhabitants could,
if they wished it, have had canals instead of streets, for most of the
thoroughfares begin and end at the ocean. Coming straight from the
ultra-Moorish Seville with its narrow winding streets, the traveller
wonders why in neighbouring Cadiz, which also belonged to the Moors for
over five hundred years, the streets should be so much wider and
straighter, and why they possess so few patios and other Arabian
characteristics. The explanation lies in the fact that almost the entire
town was newly laid out and rebuilt after the bombardment in 1596. Cadiz
being practically on an island is much cooler than Seville, so that
Moorish patios are not essential to comfort, and their places are taken
by the turrets on the top of the houses, from whence sea-breezes and a
magnificent view can be obtained at the same time.

The history of Cadiz is an epitome of the progress of civilisation up to
the time when Spain was the chiefest nation of the world. It capitulated
to Hamilcar Barca in B.C. 237, it was fortified by Cæsar, rebuilt in
marble by Balbus, and destroyed by the Goths. Its greatness was its
misfortune. So rich it was that England in 1596 fitted out an expedition
to sack the city. Lord Essex did his work so thoroughly that Cadiz was
brought to the verge of bankruptcy, and Spain received the first blow to
her supremacy. Two other English expeditions against this place proved
unsuccessful; but it was bombarded at the end of the eighteenth century,
it was devastated by the plague, and was the theatre of the horrible
massacres in the revolution of 1820. Cadiz supplied the ancient Roman
epicures with salt fish and anything but proper dancing girls; and was
resorted to by philosophers, who came here to study the curious
phenomena of the tides. A city with such a history might be expected to
be full of antiquarian records; yet, from a mere archæological point of
view, it is by no means a place of great attractiveness. In the convent
of San Francisco is to be seen the last Murillo, the picture upon which
the artist was engaged when he fell from the scaffold and sustained his
fatal injuries; but beyond this and the cathedral, which is not
remarkable, the city is destitute of works of art.

Moreover, Cadiz is one of the noisiest cities in Spain; but it is, none
the less, a delightful city to live in. Here the beggar nuisance is
unknown, its society is, with the exception of that of Madrid and
Barcelona, the most cultivated in the Peninsula, and its women are the
most graceful in Andalusia. The Alameda, where everybody promenades in
the evening, commands lovely views of the ocean, the blue of which is
varied, according to the light, with rich dark green and royal purple.
And in a walk along the sea walls surrounding the city one passes large
mercantile storehouses, and mixes with sailors from all parts of the
world--negroes and Moors (betokening the nearness of Africa), troops of
soldiers who are always at the quick step, and crowds of hardy,
picturesque, and sun-browned fishermen.



One does not find in Cadiz the virile gaiety that prevails in Seville.
The tone is quieter, more subdued and less fitful. If the Sevillians are
not intensely joyous, they are in tears--the people of Cadiz take their
happiness as it comes, rather than make it a sacrifice to their
subsequent peace of mind. They are as tidy and attractive as their own
orderly, sunny streets, and invariably courteous both between themselves
and towards strangers. The women are taller than their sisters of
Seville, a trifle darker, and a shade less languishing, but--they are
Andalusian, and in that admittance the highest compliment to feminine
fascination is paid.

Different, quite different from Cadiz, different in situation, tone, and
complexion is Malaga. Seen from the shore, the houses stand out in
violet and yellow against a background of green and reddish hills, and
on either side of the town the mountains stretch out into the distance
as far as the eye can reach. The site of the city is excellent; its
harbour is one of the best in the kingdom; and in importance it ranks
next to Barcelona among the commercial centres of Spain. Its merchants
are men of substance, and their villas are objects of beauty in suburbs
that are naturally beautiful. But Malaga does not appeal to the heart of
the visitor as does Cadiz or Córdova. The certain grandeur that one
notes from a distance dwindles almost to vanishing point as one comes
nearer; and when one plunges into the narrow, ill-kept, malodorous
streets of the lower town, the delusion is dispelled altogether. But one
has only to leave the city behind one to regain the first impression of
its picturesqueness. If one would see Malaga at its best, an expedition
must be undertaken to the summit of the high hill which overlooks the
city. The tramway takes one the first part of the journey--the only part
that the average Spaniard ever attempts. I am not sure that I blame him
for stopping short there. The walk up that brown-baked hill under the
fierce rays of the morning sun is an achievement that makes some call
upon one’s powers of endurance, but the view from the summit fully
atones for the discomforts of the climb. At one’s feet lies picturesque
Malaga, set in a huge garden of tropical and semi-tropical floral
vegetation; beyond it the blue, clear, glinting Mediterranean stretches
far out to where, in the distance, the shores of Africa are dimly
visible.

Although the land winds are occasionally variable and trying, the
climate of Malaga is one of the most equable in Europe. Winter as we
know it is unknown here; and the sugar cane, which is destroyed by the
merest suspicion of frost, is cultivated on a large and profitable
scale. As an invalid resort it has a considerable repute, but it is as a
flourishing commercial centre rather than a sanitorium that Malaga is
best known. The raisins of Malaga are famous, the manufacture of sugar
gives employment to some thousands of hands, while its wines are widely
celebrated. The port receives visits from upwards of 2,500 vessels
annually; and although the air of thrift and prosperity is not so marked
as it is in Barcelona, and its people lack the sterling integrity and
moral balance of the Catalans, there are unmistakable evidences of
progress and improvements in its streets. Much building is in progress,
the paving of the thoroughfares is receiving attention, and the new
stores and warehouses that are being erected are constructed on the most
modern plan. Like Cadiz, Malaga is of immemorial antiquity; and, like
the white city on the west of Gibraltar, it is singularly deficient in
antiquarian monuments. Phœnicians, Carthagenians and Romans occupied it
in turn; the Moors caused it to be styled “a paradise on earth;” and the
French sacked it in 1810 and walked off with twelve millions of reals in
gold and silver. The present cathedral, which was nearly 200 years in
the making, presents a motley appearance. Many architects have put much bad art into
its decoration, and with the exception of the magnificently-carved
_Silleria del Coro_, archæologists find little in it to engage their
attention.

The reports as to the amount of ignorance that prevails in Malaga are
probably exaggerated, since commercial progress and ignorance do not
usually go hand-in-hand. But there is no gainsaying the fact that
superstition, which is most nearly allied to, and has its foundation in
ignorance, is widespread; and the people are notorious for their
republican tendencies. The sacredness of human life is only imperfectly
understood here; and juries are even, according to official report,
culpably averse to bringing in adequate verdicts in cases of
manslaughter. The Andalusian is quick-tempered and impulsive--he acts
without thinking when he is provoked--and stabbing cases are the not
infrequent outcome of the most trifling disagreements. The Procurator
Fiscal of Malaga has commented severely upon the leniency with which
juries regard such offences. But how can one bring home the heinous
nature of manslaughter to a number of men who know themselves capable of
committing it within the hour if the provocation should arise; and who
realise, moreover, that the person charged only acted on the spur of the
moment, and was desperately sorry for his hastiness the moment
afterwards? And if the Malaga people are prone to swift individual
action, they will act collectively with equal passion and the same
entire want of conviction. One might, and possibly would, live all one’s
life in the city without coming to any harm, but the reading in the
newspapers of frequent impetuous blood-lettings conduces to a feeling of
insecurity.

After bustling, thriving Malaga, one finds in Ronda--“the Tivoli of
Andalusia”--a haven of wondrous peace and infinite loveliness.
Half-a-century ago Ronda was one of the gayest, the most flourishing,
the most beautifully-situated towns in the south of Spain.
Half-a-century ago it was the grand centre of smuggling for the mountain
district of which it was the capital; and at that date “free trade” was
a very feasible, highly profitable, and eminently virtuous method of
earning a livelihood. But the decay of smuggling meant the diminution of prosperity and
_joyaunce_. No longer are the streets alive with dancing and the
strumming of guitars. Contrabandists in costumes of picturesque
splendour no longer linger in its shadows. Ronda has lost its air of
thrift and light-heartedness, but the situation of the town still
remains to maintain its world-wide renown for beauty. A long tract of
table-land terminates, with the abruptness of an ocean-cliff, in a
precipice varying in height from 800 to 1,000 feet. On this natural
platform stands Ronda above an Alpine valley, in which the orange and
olive flourish in rich luxuriance. The view from the bridge is a sheer
delight. A chasm, 300 feet wide, divides the old town from the new. It
is spanned by a massive wooden bridge, under which, at a depth
of some 700 feet, the Guadalvin rushes forth into open day from the
caverns which hitherto have imprisoned its waters. In a bound it clears
a huge ledge of rock and dashes onward down the slope, until, having
fertilised the green meadows of the valley, it finally empties itself
into the green-hued and romantic Guadairo. The sides of the cliff are
covered with festoons of moist, fresh creepers; and nothing could be
more delightful than the transition from the sun-baked town into these
cool depths, where the spray of the waterfall, dropping like unseen,
gentle dew, maintains a perpetual freshness.

Capitulo XIII. Bull-fighting.

The _banderilleros_ now come forward. They are costumed like Figaro, in
the opera of “Il Barbiere de Sevilla,” and their hair is tied into a
knot behind. To the English spectator, this part of the performance is
the most fascinating and least abhorrent of the entire piece. The
_banderillero_ inflicts no more pain on the bull than the humane angler
deals out to the wily trout, and the agility and daring with which he
addresses himself to his task is superb. His aim is to plant small
barbed darts, or _banderillas_, on each side of the neck of the bull.
The _chulos_, or apprentices, here open the ball by tantalising the
animal, and working him up to a proper pitch of fury. Then the
_banderilleros_ circle round him, and one, standing full in his line of
flight, “defies” him with the arms raised high over his head. If the
bull stops, as he is doing now, the man walks composedly towards him.
Then the bull lowers his head and makes his rush, and the athlete,
swerving nimbly to one side, pins in his _banderillas_ simultaneously.
Again and again the maddened animal, frantic more from impotence than
pain, makes his rushes from one tormentor to another. At each rush he
receives further instalments of his hated decorations. Then one man
bungles. He loses his nerve, or, failing to time the animal’s charge,

It is curious to find, in talking with learned enthusiasts on the
relative merits of the bull-fighters, what diversity of opinion exists;
but all parties are agreed upon the unrivalled skill and daring of the
mighty Frascuelo. In his day, for death’s whistle summoned him from the
arena in the height of his fame, Frascuelo was regarded as the greatest
_matador_ that Spain had ever seen; and Spaniards, in debating the
subject of the bull-ring, never indulge the hope that his equal will
ever arise to shed a new glory on the National sport. Frascuelo is dead,
and his famous rival, Guerra, or Guerrita--to give him his professional
name--has long since cut off his _coleta_, and lives in well-earned
retirement at Córdova. But the school of fighters, who claim Frascuelo
as their master--the fearless, dare-devil _toreros_, who scorn to
concede a yard of ground to the bull, and do all their fighting at close
quarters--is widely popular; and if their terribly dangerous methods are
attended by frequent casualties, the intoxicating applause that rewards
the accomplishment of a brilliant coup is, apparently, ample
compensation for the risks that it entails. But the wildest appreciation
of a successful feat does not exempt the most popular performer from the
furious condemnation of the multitude when his scheme miscarries. The
allowances made by a Spanish audience at the ring-side are of the most
grudging nature. I once travelled from Barcelona to Madrid in the
company of Bombita-Chico--the boy Bombita--who, although he was barely
recovered from an unfortunate encounter with a tricky bull eight days
before, was on his way to take part in a grand _corrida_ that was to be
held in the capital. He was--as his name denotes--no more than a lad,
with large, strong hands that sparkled with jewels, while a formidable
anchor about five inches long, set with magnificent diamonds, dangled
from his watch-chain. 

Murillo’s heart was divided between beggars and babyhood--he seems to
have taught the Spaniards benevolence towards the one and devotion to
the other. Most of the beggar-boy pictures have been transferred to
foreign collections, but remains the Holy Families and the
cherub-peopled Annunciations. Of those Andalusian cherubs a charming
American author, Katharine Lee Bates, has written, “Such ecstatic
rogues as they are! Their restless ringlets catch azure shadows from the
Virgin’s mantle; they perch tiptoe on the edges of the crescent moon;
they hold up a mirror to her glory and peep over the frame to see
themselves; they pelt St. Francis with roses; they play bo-peep from
behind the fleecy folds of cloud; they try all manner of aerial
gymnastics. But a charm transcending even theirs dwells in these baby
Christs that almost spring from the Madonna’s arms to ours, in those
Christs that touch all boyhood with divinity. The son of the Jewish
carpenter, happy in his father’s workshop with bird and dog; the
shepherd lad whose earnest eyes look toward his waiting flock; the
lovely playmates, radiant with innocent beauty, who bend together above
the water of life--from these alone might Catholic Spain have learned
the sacredness of childhood. But Spain first showed Murillo the vision
that he rendered back to her.”

Capítulo XVII. Mining.
Jacob, in his _History of the Precious Metals_, says: “This oppression and
exhaustion of the native labourers led to a trade in human beings which
was carried on by the Carthaginians with the interior of Africa, and
supplied to Andalusia the place of those native workmen who had been
destroyed by the excessive toil imposed on them by their Asiatic
intruders. This horrid traffic was extended and continued, and it
augmented the produce of the mines of Spain in such a degree as to have
an influence on the whole commerce of the world at that period. That
influence was continued for upwards of seven hundred years, until the
Government of the Romans, who succeeded the Carthaginians in the mastery
of Spain, had fallen into the hands of the Gothic monarchs.”

The site of a mine at Córdova, for instance, was indicated by a
series of seven abandoned and rubbish-filled shafts, forming an
irregular row of workings. One or two of these shafts at either end of
the row had been tested without yielding any satisfactory results, and
when the property passed, at a nominal figure, into the hands of English
capitalists the manager received instructions to empty these shafts. He
started at one end and cleared three of the seven holes, only to find
that they stopped suddenly at a few yards from the surface. Then,
following the course that had been taken by the Romans and the more
recent Spanish proprietors, he began at the other end only to find that
the supposed shafts were no more than huge pot holes. Disappointed with
the fruitlessness of his efforts he wired to London, “Have cleared six
holes. No trace of lode.” The answer was instantly returned to the
despondent manager:--“Clear the seventh.” Acting on these instructions
the centre shaft was cleared, and at a little depth he came upon a
massive iron door which proved to be the entrance to the enormous
ancient workings which the Carthaginians had hidden for over two
thousand years by this ingenious device of digging dummy shafts, and so
giving succeeding generations the impression that the mine was a
worthless and abandoned prospect.

They are believed by Jacob to have re-opened the Roman silver mines in the
present French division of the Pyrenees, and to have worked the gold
mines at Lares, the silver mine of Zalamea in Andalusia, and that of
Constantina, near Cazalla. The hills of Jaen, upon which they
principally concentrated their exertions, are pierced with over five
thousand shallow pits, which are estimated to have been the work of five
centuries. Even the approximate amount of the precious metals obtained
as the result of Arab mining in Spain is a matter of the merest
conjecture.

This condition of affairs has obtained very largely in the iron industry
of Northern Spain--an industry that is so widely known that it is
unnecessary here to make more than passing reference to it; but in the
Southern Provinces (principally) of Almeria, Granada, and Murcia, the
iron mines are being developed in the interests of a far larger number
of persons. Both foreign and Spanish capital is invested in the
enterprise, and many of the mines are fully equipped with wire tramways
and American waggons, and the promise of the future of the Southern iron
fields is well on its way to being realised. Foreign capitalists are
embarked in the venture which, until now, has attracted the attention of
few Englishmen; and, indeed, until recently Englishmen have only
possessed a vague idea of the magnitude and richness of Spain’s mineral
deposits. The French people realised it long ago, and attempted, in a
half-hearted and parsimonius manner, to develop them, but with only
indifferent success. Native enterprise proved even less satisfactory,
and the attempt of the Government to work the world-famous Rio Tinto
mines resulted in utter failure, and the sale of the property by public
tender in 1873. The Rio Tinto mines, like those of Tharsis,
 were extensively developed by the Romans, 
and so perfect was the smelting process they adopted, that in the heap
of ancient slag on the surface hardly a trace of copper remains. The
Phoenicians and Carthaginians both worked the Rio Tinto property prior
to the advent of the Romans, and their galleries and shafts are found in
every direction and at every depth explored by the Moderns. Especially
on the North lode are found innumerable shafts and vast slag heaps, the
latter testifying to the great extent of their smelting operations. On
this lode are also to be seen the traces, now almost obliterated, of a
Roman town and a Roman cemetery; while upon the summit of the Cerron
Salomon (3,000 feet) are the outlines of a fortified enclosure covering
many acres. From the time when the Roman occupation was broken up by the
inroads of the Visigoths, until the middle of the sixteenth century Rio
Tinto fell into utter oblivion. The Moors apparently never directed
their attention to them. An attempt was made to reopen the mines under
Philip II., but the purpose failed, and for another two centuries the
property remain neglected.

Ultimately they were leased to a Swede named Liebert Wolters in 1725,
and the property reverted to the Crown in 1783. The Government at first
leased the mines, but the wretchedly unsatisfactory result of this
arrangement prompted them for a while to undertake the management. The
loss to the Government was so great that they disposed of the mines in
1872 for £4,000,000 to a group of capitalists, who formed the present
Rio Tinto Company. This company has developed the property on a vast
scale, and in accordance with the dictates of modern science. A railway
line has been constructed to Huelva, a distance of fifty-three miles,
terminating in a pier nearly half-a-mile long in the River Odiel. This
pier consists of two floors, used respectively for loading and
unloading. It has, at some portions of its section, ten lines of railway
abreast and above, and can easily berth five large steamers. The ore for
export is brought from the mines and shot directly into the ships’
holds. The quantity of pyrites extracted in 1901 was 1,928,776 tons, of
which 633,949 tons were exported. The sulphur ore shipped in that year
was 119,683 tons, and 21,100 tons of copper were produced by treatment
at the mines. Of the ore that is not exported a portion is worked up
into copper by the cementation process, and the remainder by smelting.
The sulphur fumes emitted by the roasting, which is a necessary prelude
to parts of the processes, had denuded the surrounding hills of every
vestige of vegetation before the company commenced operations; and the
so-called Hill of the Pines has not borne a tree for thirty or forty
years past.

At the Rio Tinto mines there are nearly fifty miles of railway above
ground and over ten miles underground, all of which are available for
locomotive traffic. The underground workings are all reached by adits or
galleries running in from the hill-side on different levels. Nearly
fifty locomotives are daily employed in these workings, besides those
used for the traffic to Huelva. The original town has been greatly
enlarged, and three or four separate villages have been built by the
company for the housing of their army of workmen, which numbers between
10,000 and 11,000 persons. Stores have been opened to supply the needs
of the workmen, schools have been founded and hospitals built, both at
Huelva and the mines, and forty armed guards, recruited out of the Civil
Guard, are maintained to preserve order and protect property. The
company has also constructed several reservoirs for the storage of
water, which is of such importance in copper mining. The largest of
these, which is about twice the area of the Serpentine, has a depth of
seventy feet, and a capacity of 2,570,000 tons, or 575,000,000 gallons.
These figures convey some impression of the vastness of the undertaking,
but another figure may be added, viz., the revenue of the company, which
last year amounted to upwards of £1,800,000. Of this sum over one and
three-quarter million sterling was profit on sale of produce.

The Tharsis mines, though not such a remarkable proposition as the Rio
Tinto, form a notable property. They appear to have been practically
abandoned from the time of the Roman occupation until 1865, and were not
worked at a profit until they were acquired by the present Scotch
company. Since then, however, an enormous quantity of ore has been
extracted, and last year a total output of some 400,000 tons of metal
returned a profit of over £320,000. The mines are connected by a railway
twenty-eight miles in length with the pier station at Corrales, a short
distance from Huelva, on the opposite bank of the river Odiel. A fine
iron pier, 765 yards long, allows the ore for export to be carried
direct to the ships. The Tharsis mines and the Lagunazo mines are now
yielding considerably smaller returns of copper ore; but at the Calanas
mines the output is steadily increasing, and vigorous exploration work
in this portion of the property has disclosed, in addition to the
already proved resources of ore which can be profitably treated for the
production of copper, a large mass of low-grade ore, which, though
comparatively poor in copper is rich in sulphur.

The Rio Tinto and the Tharsis have been rightly regarded as the show
mines of Spain, and the former can, of course, hold its own among the
leading mines of the world; and, if it is unlikely that any other
Spanish property will rival this cupiferous wonder, there are many that,
under proper scientific management, will be found to be as relatively
rich and profitable. What is required in Spain is money for development
and brains to direct the operations. The existence of minerals, and of
copper particularly, has been demonstrated; and now that English capital
is slowly but in steadily increasing amount being invested in these
mines, a tremendous reaction in the industry may confidently be looked
for in this quarter of the globe. Within the past year or two quite a
number of promising properties have been acquired for the English
markets, and in every instance the results of the opening-up work have
more than realised the expectations of the proprietors. The company,
which was formed a short time ago to acquire an extensive property at
Coruña, is regarded by experts as a proposition of the highest
importance. Another company, called the Escurial Copper Mines, is
already working at a profit, and promises to give very large returns for
many years to come. La Recompensa Mines also appear to be rich in
copper, and the ore also contains precious metals, assays giving as much
as 12 ozs. of silver and 9½ dwts. of gold to the ton. An important fact
in connection with all these mines is that they are only distant two
miles from the Escurial Mines; consequently the cost of ore treatment
will be considerably reduced by reason of the proximity of large
smelting works now nearing completion. The latest reports from the
Huercal Copper-cobalt Mines, in the province of Almeria, all tend to
confirm the very high opinion which the English owners formed of their
value at the time they acquired the property; and the English-owned Rio
Rimal Mines in the province of Gerona are putting out very fine copper.


Silver-lead, although not so widely distributed over Spain as are some
other minerals, is found in no fewer than half-a-dozen provinces; and
the industry is, generally speaking, in a healthy condition. In the case
of the mines of Granada, transport difficulties have had to be overcome;
and in Guadalajara, Murcia and Navarra, the want of capital and the
absence of scientific methods have militated against their progress. The
most favourable conditions for lead mining exist in the provinces of
Badajoz, Jaén, Córdova and Ciudad-Real, where foreign capital has been
more freely invested, and very large profits have already been obtained.
Such astute investors as the Rothschilds are heavily interested in these
latter districts, and of recent months several concessions have been
acquired for the English market and are now being developed with English
capital.

The number of Spanish mines that, having been abandoned by one set of
owners, have been taken over by other persons and profitably exploited,
is extraordinarily large--in fact, it might almost be said that there
are few important properties in the Peninsula that have not changed
hands at least once before enriching their proprietors. The Triumfo
Silver-lead Mine at Córdova is an interesting case in point. So much
fruitless exploration work was done on this mine that the French owners
had come to the conclusion that further endeavours would only be
wasted; but after listening to the combined entreaties of the Spanish
foreman and their French manager, they reluctantly agreed to continue
working for a few more weeks. Before the extension limit had been
reached, an enormous seam of silver-lead had been located; and the
output of the Triumfo to-day is only limited by the market requirements
and the obligations entered into by the company. In La Mancha there is a
silver lead-mine which a French company, after sinking an enormous
amount of working capital and failing to strike the lode, abandoned as a
“duffer.” On the representations of the Spanish mine captain, who never
doubted the existence of the lode at depth, the property was taken over
for a nominal consideration by some Scotch financiers. The Spaniard’s
sanguine predictions were speedily verified; and for the expenditure of
a trifling amount of further capital the Scotch investors acquired a
mine of extraordinary richness, which has been returning them enormous
dividends ever since.

In lead mining, the element of speculation is reduced to a minimum. In
other branches of mining, 60 per cent. of the properties are failures;
in silver-lead mining, 60 per cent. of the properties are successful.
And, in the case of the 40 per cent. of the silver-lead mines that turn
out badly, the explanation is that sufficient preliminary care has not
been bestowed on proving the existence of the lodes before commencing
operations. What may appear to be a lode may prove only a pocket; but
where proper precautions are taken, this risk may be eliminated. The
French engineers largely failed in their mining ventures in Spain for
this very reason. They made haste too quickly, as the Americans say, and
they were not expert economists. Then there is another favourable
element in lead mining--it can be conducted with only a shaft and a
winch--and as soon as the lode is reached, the mine commences to pay. A
very large number of properties are locally owned, and the mines of
Ciudad-Real, Badajoz, Jaén, Córdova, Seville and Almeria supply the
markets of Europe with lead. It is found in large lodes, it is cheaply
worked, and there is a ready market for the produce. It is, therefore, a
branch of mining that commends itself to the fancy of the small
capitalist; while the large capitalist is so eager to secure the ore
that he will even advance money on it before it is taken out of the
mine. The works at Peñarroya, and the smelting firms at Carthagena and
elsewhere, absorb the entire output.

THE HUERCAL COPPER COBALT MINES.

A railway journey of 20 hours’ duration, over three railroad systems,
transports the visitor from Madrid to the little mining town of Huercal
(pronounced Whercal) Overa. We leave the capital by the express train
for Alicante, and travel _via_ Alcázar and Albacete to Chinchilla, which
is reached at some unearthly hour in the middle of the night. From
Chinchilla the line runs through the beautiful province of Murcia to
Lorca, where we change onto a small English railroad which takes us to
Huercal. We had left Madrid in our winter overcoats and rugs; when we
stepped out into the soft sunshine of Almeria we could have dispensed
with our under coats and waistcoats. We are in the land of the spring
roses and early oranges, and the nipping and eager air of the capital is
forgotten. Our visit is regarded by the community with general interest,
for the townsfolk look to _El Monte Minado_, as the copper mines are
known locally, to make the fortunes of Huercal-Overa. Many of the
leading people here are shareholders in the mines, and all the labour
employed on the property is drawn from the town. There is not a child
in the neighbourhood who is unacquainted with the personality of the
Spanish representative of the English proprietors, who acts as our
cicerone, and the word goes round that he is come to town. The mine
captain, and several prominent people of the district, are at the
station to meet us; and in the sitting-room that has been reserved for
our use in the comfortable hotel we find the table laid, not for dinner,
but with an array of valuable specimens taken from the mine. Here is copper
in practically every form--green carbonate of copper (malachite), blue
carbonate of copper (azurite), red oxide of copper (cuprite), copper
pyrites (yellow sulphuret of copper), and native copper. Added to this,
the abundant association of cobalt--cobalt steel-gray, and pinkish
purple, like the hue of peach-blossom in colour--and of bright emerald
green tinted nickel, give the specimens an extremely beautiful
appearance. The _Monte Minado_ property comprises a copper hill not
unlike the celebrated Mount Morgan in conformation, and has an area of
111½ acres. There are indications that point to Phœnician industry in
the Huercal Mine, but the traces of later workmanship demonstrate
conclusively that the Romans were the last of the Ancients who exploited
this copper mountain on a large scale. It was the Romans who
obliterated so carefully all traces of their handiwork, and filled up
with rubbish the openings of their levels and other workings.

The present leaseholders opened their negotiations for the purchase of
the Huercal Mines on the strength of the mammoth dumps which from a
number of assays made by different firms gave results varying from 5·71
per cent. to 10·40 per cent. of copper, 2·19 per cent. of nickel, and
3·13 per cent. of cobalt. It was argued that even if the mines were
worked out, the dumps alone, if scientifically treated with modern
machinery, would return a handsome profit. But very little exploration
work was required to convince the Englishmen that so far from the
property being exhausted of its mineral treasures, the bulk of the
mineral had been little more than pecked at; and a more comprehensive
system of development disclosed the fact that in _El Monte Minado_ they
had acquired a copper-cobalt mine of extraordinary richness. The
consistent and surprising richness of the dumps in carbonates and copper
pyrites made it abundantly clear that if the Romans, with their
primitive methods and appliances, had regarded this ore as unprofitable
for treatment, they must have found still more valuable deposits to
engage their attention. There could be no other excuse for regarding
five per cent. copper ore as débris. For the first time since the Roman
miners left their Bonanza, the old workings were now cleared and the
mystery was solved. These ancient galleries, as will be seen from the
illustrations, were not driven on any systematic plan, but simply
followed the lodes blindly through all their twists and curves. The idea
of going boldly through the mountain and sweeping all before them does
not appear to have been considered practicable by the Romans; and,
doubtless, the danger of excavating in the soft country rock on a large
scale had also been taken into their calculations. As the workings were
freed from the rubbish that choked every drive and level, further traces
of cobalt and nickel were encountered, and copper in its many beautiful
forms became more abundant, and of richer quality. In the Napoleon
gallery the ore was assayed to yield from 17·17 per cent. to 78·69 per
cent. of copper, and at the extreme end of it was found to be in the
face of a three-foot lode, in which native copper was also discovered.


The Coruna Copper Company’s property, which covers an area of 2,540
acres--a tract of country more than six times as large as Hyde Park--is
situated in the mining district of Santiago, and is connected with the
railway, which is about eight miles distant, by a first-class road. The
country in which the concession is situated, consists of a series of low
rolling hills, and the character of the ore, so far as it has yet been
explored by the prospecting operations, is very similar to that produced
by the Rio Tinto and Tharsis Mines. It is a low grade copper ore,
carrying on the average twenty-three per cent. of sulphur, and from two
to three per cent. of copper. No attempt was made by the late owners to
determine by a systematic series of borings the extent over which the
mineral actually exists, or the depth and character of the ore; but the
prospecting work already carried out by the English company, and the
natural outcrops found at many points on the concession, place it, in
the estimation of some mining experts, quite beyond doubt that the mass
of mineral is one of the largest known, extending in one direction for
over two miles, apparently without a break. This preliminary work has
clearly proved the whole of the north-west quarter of the concession;
and taking the outcrops into account, one-half of the whole ground is
assumed to contain mineral. Three shafts and nine trenches are being
sunk, and numerous outcrops have also been located on the concession.
The original estimate of the quantity of mineral was 50,000,000 cubic
metres, equal in round figures to 250,000,000 tons. The most recent
assays indicate a mean of three per cent. copper in the ore. The
prospecting work has in every instance proved the accuracy of original
estimates as to the value of the property, as well as the correctness of
the opinion, that a very large output could be obtained with practically
none of the unproductive development work required in most mining
enterprises. It was recommended that mining operations should be chiefly
“open-cut,” and of the simplest character, the exceptionally favourable
conditions under which the ore exists rendering operations an extremely
easy and inexpensive matter. The property is being opened up on these
lines, and it is considered there will be no difficulty in supplying the
concentrating works with 1,000, 2,000, or even 3,000 tons per day, all
obtained from open cutting.



