Chapter II. PASSING INTO SPAIN 

The next morning I packed up my knapsack — ^and soon 
I was going down Waterport Street to board one of the 
boats that ran over the bay to Algeciras. On my way I 
dropped into a money-changer's to turn an English 
sovereign into Spanish coin. I got thirty-three pesetas 
and eighty cfentimos. The rate of exchange was marked 
up on a bulletin board outside the money-changer's office. 

I was going to Spain armed with a revolver, a passport, 
a knapsack, and no knowledge of the language. My 
mission was at once unique and roving. I was to travel 
right from the south to the north to see how things looked 
to the absolutely new eye. I was to see as much of the 
life of the country as I could — to go into and explore the 
towns, to go through the mountains, to tramp through 
country parts, to see the cathedrals and places of art on 
my way, in fine, to see Spain from as many view-points as 
possible. My first definite point was Seville. I was to 
see a buU-fight there, and then I was to go on as my fancy 
led me. I was bound to the wheel of no plan. 

My utter ignorance of the language was a positive 
advantage. No one would be able to tell me this or that 
or the other thing. I would have to use my eyes. Of 
course, many things would be hidden from me because of 
not knowing Spanish. But then, on the other hand, I 


would see things from an absolutely outside standpoint. 
And this was what I wanted. 

I thought of all this as I went over the bay to Algeciras 
— a distance of six miles. 

Chapter III.— ON A SPANISH RAILWAY JOURNEY 

At Algeciras I took the train for Seville. 

I had been told in Gibraltar that there was to be a 
bull-fight on the following Sunday, and that after that 
there might probably not be another fight for two months. 
I had therefore to get to Seville as quickly as possible, 
as it was now Thursday. 

The train ran on at a moderate speed through a cactus- 
covered, rocky country. The beginning of my journey 
through Spain was on easy, luxurious lines. How I was 
to fare on my journey after Seville I neither knew nor 
cared. I had been an old tramp who had gone along 
many roads and got through many journeys. I was 
now to journey through Spain. Through the whole of 
my life I had been going up hill and down dale — taking 
the rough with the smooth. The thing in life was to 
keep an open mind and an easy conscience. Everything 
comes out well for the man who takes things with calm. 

The train ran with very moderate swiftness for some 
miles till it came to a station. Then it stopped, and 
nearly everybody flocked out on to the platform. I 
wondered if all the people were getting out at this first 
station. But no— -they just stood on the platform and 
talked to each other. And as the train still stopped there 

I ventured to get out myself. And there was the guard 
of the train smoking a cigarette and talking to the engine- 
driver. And the station-master — ^who was also smoking a 
cigarette — was talking to a passenger. In fact everybody 
was talking — and smoking cigarettes. I could not, of 
course, talk to any one myself — ^for I knew no Spanish — 
so I took refuge in one of my own cigarettes. 

At first I thought that something was wrong with the 
engine. But this idea soon left my mind, for I could see 
no one doing anything but smoking and standing about. 
So I gave up the riddle as to why we were stopping in 
the station. 

After about ten minutes a great bell rang in the station, 
and we all got aboard. But the train did not budge till 
the bell rang again. 

Off we were going again at a more moderate speed 
than ever through the same cactus-covered, rocky country. 
And then we came to another station. 

Here again we stopped for about ten minutes whilst 
everybody got out and lit up cigarettes and passed the 
time of day to each. 

This time I inquired the reason from the guard of 
the train who was sitting gracefully on a box on the 
platform. He accepted the cigarette I offered him as I 
asked the question. But he was unable to answer me, for 
he knew no English. 

At the next station the stop occurred again. There 
was as usual no reason for a stop of ten minutes. No 
one was doing anything. 

And then gradually the mystery became clear to me. 
It began to perforate through my intelligence that this 
was the method of railway travelling in Spain. The 
Spaniards believed in giving the engine a rest after every 
run. It seemed to me to be a good and humane plan. 

After six or seven stations had passed I fell into the 
humour of this deliberate method of railway travelling. 
It had its advantages. It was calculated to lengthen life 
and make smaller the risk of railway accidents. And 
besides it gave one a chance to get the cramp from out 
of one's legs by walking on the platform. True, it 
seemed to me that I could have tramped almost as fast 
to Seville as this train was carrying me, but — well, that 
was only a mere outside circumstance. I was now in 
Spain and the right thing to do was to put up with 
Spain and all its ways and works. Besides, the thing 
really suited me. This easy method of bowling along 
was in key with my temperament. Hurry was the curse 
and nuisance of the world. And from that hour I began 
to like the Spaniards. This calm and easy railway journey 
impressed me favourably. 

The people on the platforms of the stations at which 
we stopped were very friendly and obliging to me. As I 
walked along the platform, a few of them always followed 
offering to sell me various things. I could not tell what 
they were saying to me, but I could feel that they were 
assuring me that the articles were at once very cheap and 
very excellent. One old woman wanted to sell me an 
immense melon. And she was so persistent up to the very 
end that I thought she meant to force it upon me as a 
present. At another station a young man wanted to sell me 
a hare. Why he thought I wanted a hare I don't know. 
Beggars, too, were on the platforms — cross-eyed beggars. 

lame beggars^male beggars, female beggars, beggars of all 
shapes and ages and sizes. And at every station there 
was a soldier on guard with a bayonet fixed to his rifle. 
He was there to prevent smuggling. 

The train was now running through a mountainous, 
picturesque country. We were going up higher and 
higher all the time. And we passed through gorges and 
skirted around mountains and pierced through dark 
tunnels. And the scenery through which we passed at 
last became wild^Mid grand and desolate. 

We got to a place called Ronda as the sun was settling 
down over the mountains. The town was high up and 
circling around it as far as the eye could see were lofty 
mountains. Here in Ronda the air was much cooler 
than it was in Algeciras. We were now in the province 
of Malaga. 

The train stopped here for the day, and I found that 
I could not begin my journey again for Seville till nine 
the next morning. So at the solicitation of a guide who 
spoke almost perfect English I went with my knapsack 
and put up at a hotel near by. 


I seemed to be the only guest in the hotel, and I felt 
rather lonesome. But the waiter was a good sort. He gave 
me his card. His name was Juan Delgado. He could not 
speak a word of English, but somehow or another we 
managed to convey ideas to each other. He was a native 
of Cadiz, and was a young fellow with a fine open face. 

The dining-room was big, but it was badly lit and 
was full of shadows. I felt rather sorry that I had taken 
the fluent guide's advice in coming to the place. I might 
have done better somewhere else. As yet I had not seen 
the landlord. Nobody seemed to be in the place but 
Juan. He, I felt, was all right, but I neither liked the 
place nor the guide who had brought me to it. 

However, things began to look a little rosier after I 
had a bottle of wine. And when dinner was over Juan 
proposed that we should go together and have a look at 
the town. I was glad of the proposal. Even though he 
could not speak a word of English I much preferred him 
to the guide. 

The actual town of Ronda lay off from us nearly a 
mile, and the lights from it presented a curious spectacle 
through the darkness* They were up high and down 
low — as if the town was built upon a broken, uneven 
surface. And as Juan and I came nearer to it along the 
road I could hear the faint roaring of waters. 

We were soon into it and we turned up a narrow 
street and crossed a square towards a well opened and 
well lit up building. It was the Casino. 

From it was coming the sounds of music. It seemed a 
gay sort of place, and was indeed the only part of Ronda 
I had yet seen. The night was too dark for me to make 
anything out of the streets through which we passed. 

These supplermoving, glorious girls who were expressing with them- 
selves the wonder and the mystery and the subtle, magical 
thrall of life. Who were expressing the tenderness and 
the soft, glowing enchantment, and the blissful, rapturous 
delight of life. The bolero. How full it was of 
tenderness and beauty, and again how full it was of 
vigour and fire. Girls whirling and whirling around and 
swaying their hips in a magical, alluring dance. And the 
full invigorating music went on and on with the 
dance. Music at once delicious and strange and full 
of force and vigour. It blended in with the music 
and the charm of the delightful girls who were 
dancing. These delicious, beautiful girls of the south 
of Spain. These girls of golden, sunlit Andalusia. 
They were here dancing the bolero. That strange, 
maddening, rapturous dance. That dance that appealed 
to the mind and to the senses. That wonderful 
dance coming afar from the times of old. That dance 
so old and yet so new. The dance of centuries long 
gone, and still the dance of the present hour and the 
instant. A glowing, glorious, moving, enchanting, allur- 
ing dance. The bolero. The girls of Spain were here 
dancing it Here, with their white, swaying, delicious 
arms. Supple, enchanting, gloriously shaped girls. 
Dancing the bolero. 

The next morning I went to look around Ronda. I 
passed down narrow streets and by old, strange houses. 
And I crossed a plaza and entered into a great garden. 
In the garden I heard the sound of loud waters. At the 
end of it was a great, high iron palisade. The garden 
was filled with semi-tropical trees and flowers and vegeta- 
tion. Off from it I could see rising up the great 
roundness of the bull ring. 

It was a soft warm morning and the air was filled 
with a fine surpassing clearness. Far up above the sky 
was strangely and gloriously blue. 

I went up to the end of the garden and looked 
through the iron barring of the palisade. The palisade 
was on the edge of a precipice. This garden was on the 
edge of a precipice. I looked down and down, and there 
was a river roaring and dashing far down beneath. The 
Guadalevin. It was roaring and dashing and cutting its 
way through a narrow, wild ravine. And off from the 
ravine through which the Guadalevin was piercing — far 
off in the distance were rising great mountains. They 
were rising up all around in all directions as far as the 
eye could see. Great, tremendous, lofty, still mountains. 
And above them was the strange blue sky and the air 
that was filled with a fine surpassing clearness. These 
mountains here in Spain. These calm, still, distant 
mountains. Their silence brought out to the full the 
deep voice of the Guadalevin as it roared far, far down 
in the wild ravine. Still, distant mountains — a sky 
strangely blue — a wild ravine — a roaring, dashing, swift- 
piercing river. A wonderful picture to be seen from a 
garden on the edge of a precipice. 

Yonder was the part of the town wherein had lived 
centuries ago the Moors. I could see it here from the 
edge of the precipice. It was old and picturesque and 
worn. In the formation of these old stones and arches 
and strong-walled, strange-shaped houses there lived the 
expression of the times and the men of the East — ^the 
times and the men that had long gone. But the calm, 
still, distant mountains, and the strangely blue sky, and 
the roaring, dashing, swift-piercing Guadalevin, and the 
wild, strange ravine had been here then as it was here 
now. And the deep voice of the river had spoken through 
the day and through the night and through the year. It 
had spoken in the time of the Romans. Nay, it had 
spoken long before man had come and made for him- 
self a place of habitation here in these mountains. It 
had spoken through the midst of silence; and it had 
spoken through the midst of battle-cries, and through 
the cries and the moans of the maimed and wounded ; and 
it had spoken through the morning song of the muezzin, 
and again through the chant of the priest. It had spoken 
through the cries of victory and the cries of defeat that 
had come from the men in the town. This Guadalevin. 



I was passing now through the town. Going through 
the narrow streets and by the old strange houses. The 
people of this town of the mountains had an old-world, 
easy-going air. The life of the place seemed to amble 
calmly along. There was no air of hurry and unquiet. 
Men were lounging here and there in the streets — smoking 
cigarettes and doing nothing with ease and grace. 

Some of the women that I saw in paissing along were 
surprisingly good looking. Evidently Spain possessed 
the beautiful women one heard so much of. I had been 
enchanted with the beauty of the girls I had seen the 
night before dancing the bolero. 

The mantilla — the charming mantilla. Some of the 
women were wearing it. A coquettish, picturesque head 
covering. 

And this was Ronda. A town in the province ot 
Malaga. A town through which I was passing — of 
which I was getting a glimpse on my journey* A 
beautiful Spanish town in the mountains. 

I was now in the train going on towards Seville. 
The guide of the hotel — who had not impressed me 
favourably — had interviewed me on the platform at 
Ronda. He seemed to be much grieved because I had 
not availed myself of his services. But I bore his grief 
with philosophy. 

Everything went well — ^with the customary ten- 
minute stops at the stations — till we got to a place 
called Bobadilla. Here every one got out of the train. 
Bobadilla was a junction, and I had to change trains to 
get to Seville- 
Changing trains at a strange station is awkward even 
if one knows the language. One has to dash about here 
and there and ask all sorts of questions from officials 
and receive all sorts of answers. Even when you have 
got into a train that several officials agree to be the right 
one, there is often in your mind a lurking suspicion that 
you may be in the wrong one after all. 

I was now on the platform at Bobadilla engaged in 
the awful task of trying to find my train — ^without 
knowing a word of the language. There were three 
trains in the station, and the problem I had to solve was 
which was the one that went to Seville. I tackled the 
Spanish railway porter, saying "Seville" to him, and 
accompanying the word by what I deemed to be eluci« 
dating gestures. The porter was puzzled, but he was 
very polite in his manner and he spoke to me at length, 
pointing, as he spoke, at all the three trains in succession. 

"Seville," I said to him again, "Seville/' Again he 
pointed in succession at the three trains, leaving me as 
wise as I was at first. I was about to mention " Seville " 
to him again when it dawned upon me that it was a word 
utterly without magic. I looked at the porter and he 
looked at me, and then he went to another part of the 
platform. 

What would I have given to have known some 
Spanish ! This trying to find the train was dreadful. 

Suddenly I noticed the porter coming towards me 
with the station-master. The station-master raised his 
hat to me and I raised my hat to him. And the parley 
began. He was, if possible, a more polite man than the 
porter, but politeness was not what I wanted. I wanted 
information. The station-master was giving it to me 
most rapidly, but I could not take it in. I did not know 
a word of Spanish. 

But a saving angel appeared on the troubled scene in 
the shape of a man who knew a little English. He 
showed me the train I had to take for Seville. I thanked 
him and got in, congratulating myself. All at last had 
turned out well, thanks to the man who knew a little 
English ! 

And then like a flash it came upon me, partly through 
half understanding an odd word that was dropped now 
and then, and partly through the innumerable gestures 
they were both making. 

I had got on the wrong train ! Sure enough I was 
on the wrong train ! I was not going to Seville at all. 
The man who knew a little English on the platform at 
Bobadilla had put me all wrong. I lifted up my voice 
and swore heartily at him and my own stupidity. But 
swearing would not mend matters. I was on the wrong 
train ! I was going to Cordova instead of going to 
Seville. 


I asked the ticket-collector and the stout, respectable- 
looking Spaniard many questions in English » hoping 
against hope that they might get the drift of what I was 
driving at. But I might as well have asked questions of 
the dead. All they did in answer was to talk at me 
overwhelmingly in Spanish and make more gestures than 
ever. 

At last in desperation I gave the whole thing up. I 
would go on to Cordova, and try and hunt up some one 
who knew English, and get put right for Seville ! So I 
bowed apologetically to the ticket-collector and relapsed 
into quietude. 

But he would not leave me. He was trying to tell 
me something else. What this something else was I 
neither knew nor cared. But he persisted. And in the 
end he drew out a railway map and made some marks 
upon it for my general edification. And after this pulled 
some money out of his pocket, and counted out before 
me thirteen pesetas — I believe — ^and some centimos. At 
first I thought he was about to make me a present. But 
I was soon undeceived. To come to the point, it turned 
out that he wanted me to pay my fare from Bobadilla to 
Cordova. 


But I had to pay in the end. When we got to 
Cordova, he brought me before the station-master. And 
then it slowly sank into my head that I was not in 
England now. I was in Spain. In England under the 
circumstances I probably would not have had to pay. 
I could have gone back to the junction and have got into 
the right train for my destination without having to pay 
extra. It was this idea that had made me stubborn with 
the ticket collector^ But the sage reflection came to me 
that it was impossible for me to carry England with me 
on my travels. So I paid the ticket collector with grace, 
and shook hands with him. All was well. 

It turned out that a train was starting in an hour and 
a half from Cordova to Seville, But I would have to get 
another ticket for that journey also. Getting into the 
wrong train had cost me about twenty-seven pesetas, 
together with a long and tedious argument. Still, every- 
thing had happened for the best — ^for the company. 

The tr^n for Seville was a through one. I would not 
have to change anywhere, and so take the chance again 
of getting lost. It is needless to say that I was most 
thankful for this mercy. 

It was late that night when I got to Seville, and I 
went and put up at the Hotel Inglaterra in the Plaza 
San Fernando. 

Chapter IV.— SEVILLE AND THE BULL-FIGHT 

Seville is an old sunlit-town. It stands on the shining 
Guadalquivir. From the river arise the masts of ships. 

It requires but one word of Spanish to be aware of the 
fact that the bull-fight is the great institution ot Seville. 
All that you have to do is to get the fact firmly fixed in 
your head that ** toro " means bull. Thus armed you may 
go and sit in the wineshops or in the cafis and feel perfectly 
at home. You are not out of it. You are no longer a 
stranger in a strange land. You know the topic of the 
moment, the hour, and the best slice out of the night. As 
you lounge easily through the narrow, winding streets 
of Seville— dodging the sun, Spanish-wise — you will hear 
at short intervals the magic word, Toro ! It means a bull, 
but by no means does it mean an English bull. The 
most dangerous English bull is but as a mild and gentle 
lamb when compared with his Spanish brother. He would 
eat from your hand. 

Toro simply means an animal that is as active as a 
tiger — that is as savage as a tiger — that is far gamer than 
a tiger — and that has two or three times a tiger's weight. 
In a ring he would make a tiger sorry that it ever existed. 

To show you that buU-fighting is a thing of what 
might be called life interest here in Seville, I have but to  mention the fact that the little children play at it in the streets. One of them is the matador :— having a little stick 
for an espada— sword. Another represents the bull — 
running here and there with a small wooden bull's head in 
its arms. The others represent the picadores and the 
banderilleros. They dash about and around, following as 
closely as they can the rules that govern the fights in the 
Plaza de Toros. 
I like the Sevillanos. They are a fine, free and easy 
people who are skilled in the art of doing nothing in a 
lordly way. They are the most dignified loungers in the 
world. And they hold the most optimistic views as to the 
possibilities of to-morrow. To-morrow for them is the day 
of days. On that day the crooked will be made straight 
and the rough places will be made plain. Everything will 
be all right. Everything will be done to-morrow. Mafiana ! 
The word as the man of Spain uses it not only means 
to-morrowy but it means the future that is dim and far 
away — the future that is not yet to be defined — a time of 
haze and golden possibility — a time of accomplishment and 
greatness yet to come. The very sound of the word 
carries to the full its meaning. It epitomises the philosophy 
of this strange, grave, half-Eastern people. These Latins 
with the deep voices ! It is hard for the fair-haired, blue- 
eyed man of the North to know and to understand them. 
But he may easily like them. These fine, grave, courteous, 
self-contained people. 

How the sun shines here in Seville. How clear and 
soft is the air. And always there are bells ringing. One hears them ringing through the wonderful brightness of the 
day. One hears them ringing through the still, warm night. 
Seville is an old beautiful town of bells and light and 
plazas and streets that wind in wonderful and curious ways. 
An old strange town set in a blaze of gold. 

Above the vast bull-ring of Seville the sky stretched 
blue and strange and without clouds and the rays of the 
sun struck sharp down on the heads of the people who 
sat in the open glare. It was Sunday afternoon — ^the 
feast of San Pedro— and sixteen thousand men, women, 
and children were here, waiting to see the killing of the 
bulls. Through the night the great bell of the cathedral 
had tolled forth solemnly in honour of the feast, and the 
trumpeters had sounded their trumpets from the tower. 
And now it was the turn of the toreros to honour the day 
in the killing of bulls. 

The outer line of the bull-ring swept round. Cutting a 
great sharp circle against the blue sky. The sky without 
clouds. It looked as if there were but two things of 
account. The sky and the ring. Two vast implacable 
things of silence. The sixteen thousand moving, shout- 
ing people seemed as nothing. 

Upon myself had fallen the spell of silence. The 
shouts and cries and laughter of the tremendous multitude 
conveyed nothing that was definite to my mind. I knew 
no Spanish. There was no thread of language-relation 
between myself and these shouting thousands. I was 
human and they were human, and that was all. 

And for a while the scene wore for me an aspect that 
was strange and unreal. I might have been among the 
Latins of the times of old when men slew men in an arena 
such as this— when men fell dead and dying on sands 
yellow and pitiless as the sands which were stretching now 
- before me under the fierce glare of the sun of Spdn. 

There rang out a great blare of trumpets, and alguaciles 
rode into the arena clad in old Spanish dress. And then 
there broke out a military march, and the toreros and their 
followers marched out in procession before the great 
multitude. They made a brave showing — the matadores 
with their brilliant attire and red cloths and swords, the 
banderilleros with gay streamers flying from their barbed 
darts, and the mounted picadores with their long pikes. 
They saluted the president, who threw the key of the 
toril into the arena. An alguacil got off his horse, picked 
it up, and rode across the arena and handed it to the 
torilero, the keeper of the toril. 

The door of the toril was open. From it was to 
come the bull. Right across the arena I could see it from 
where I sat. An oblong, upright space of blackness, stand- 
ing in sharp relief in the hard glare of the sun. There 
was no one in the arena now save a man who was dressed 
in white. He stood motionless on a low peristyle in the 
centre of the arena. The toreros had all gone to the 
barriers. The show had opened. 

This man in white was the tancredo. He was un- 
armed and helpless. He was standing motionless, await- 
ing the chance of death. The sixteen thousand people — 
sitting in the shadow and the glare — ^watched him silently. 

A bull slowly came out of the upright space of  blackness and walked down the slope to the edge of the sand. 

It was only a few seconds since the toril had been 
opened, but it seemed to me to have been a long time. 
In that time the shouting had died down and breathlessness 
had come upon the people. 

There was the white figure of the man in the centre of 
the arena, and there, off at the edge, was the black bull, 
looking around. And everjr one was silent. 

I turned my head away for an instant, and when I 
looked again the bull was charging across the arena. He 
had seen the tancredo. He was going now to gore him, 
to kill him. A swift black thing of destruction. It was 
rushing upon this motionless man in white. 

It seemed to me as if the bull were rushing upon 
myself I could feel the coming gore of the horns and 
the toss and darkness. 

It was within a yard of the tancredo when it swerved 
and stopped dead. The man in white stiU stood 
motionless on the peristyle. The bull again approached 
him, this time slowly, and walked around him. 
Then with a toss of its head it left him, galloping off 
in the direction of the toril. A chulo had just entered 
the arena and had attracted it by the waving of his cape. 

The whole of the people were now standing, shouting. 
The tension was broken. I was shouting and cheering 
myself. It was such a brave, fine thing, to stand out 
there — ^motionless — while the bull charged ! Had the 
tancredo moved in the least he would have been gored to 
death before the toreros could get across the arena tp the 
bull. He had to stand still as stone — and in this lay his 
safety, for no bull, however furious, will strike or gore a 
thing that does not move. If a man could have the nerve 
to stand motionless before a charging bull he would be 
safe. The bull would go off without touching him. 

The chulos were now running swiftly about in the 
arena ^th their quick-waving, flying capes. The bull 
was galloping and rushing here and there, now after one, 
now after another. The men evaded the rushes with 
wonderful skill and precision. At times the upward 
sweep of the sharp horns was within an inch of one of 
them. The bull on a straight line could move faster than 
any of them. But he could not turn so quickly or so 
surely. Once he bounded right on the top of one of 
them. The man sank flat to the sand and escaped some- 
how between the lowered head of the bull and its fore- 
legs. How, I don't know. The thing was done so quick 
that the eye could not follow it. The man rolled over 
and over on the sand and the bull lowered its head to 
charge at him again, but he was drawn away by another 
chulo, who waved his cloak right in front of his horns. 
The bull struck upwards — pierced the doak — and the 
man ran, leaving it impaled. The bull had scored. By 
this time the man who had fallen had got out of the way. 
The bull was now galloping in a circle with the cape 
flying ovfer its back. But a chulo ran right dead across 
it and plucked the cape from its horns. 

At once a man went up to it and waved his cape in its 
face. The bull lunged forward, and as the man turned to 
evade the lunge he tnuled his cape after him upon the 
sand. Herein he was unfortunate, for the bull trod on  the trailing cape and dragged him down. At once the bull got his horns under him and tossed him into the 
air. But the man was hardly down on the sand again  before the bull was drawn off by the waving of another  cape. 

I could tell by the way the chulo lay that he was hurt. 
He was lifted up and carried from the arena by two of his 
comrades. I had heard it sdd that buU-fighting was a 
cowardly affair — that it was all on the side of the men — 
and that the bull had no chance. But this fight, of 
which I was an eye-witness, proves the contrary to be 
true. The bull-fighters are quick, skilful, brave men who 
take their lives in their hands every time they go into the 
arena. In fact I came to the Plaza de Toros with my 
sympathies predisposed in favoxu* of the bull. But an actual 
view of the fight and its conditions brought me on the 
side of my kind — the men. 

The banderilleros now came into the arena armed with 
the banderillas — barbed darts thirty inches long. These 
men had to get right in front of the bull as it charged — 
spring to one side at the right fraction of a second — ^and 
plant their darts in the top of its neck. Being late a 
tenth of a second would mean for them death. 

One of them approached the bull. He held a dart 
poised in either hand. The bull stood stiff and rigid. 
Then it bounded forward — but so suddenly that the 
banderillero had barely time to save himself by a quick 
move to his right. He dropped one of his darts as 
the buU whizzed past, and a great shout broke out over 
the whole of the arena. The people were applauding the 
bull which was now dashing here and there. But a chulo waved his cape in the distance and attracted it towards a banderillero who waited for it as it rushed upon him. 

He planted two darts in its neck almost as its horns 
were touching him. The bull turned and ran on only 
to meet another banderillero, who also planted a dart in 
its neck. 

There was now a great uproar. Every one was 
excited and shouting wildly. I turned round to look at the 
faces of the people. They were all intent and eager upon 
the fight — men, women, and children. Their eyes were 
following the movements of the enraged bull and the 
flying banderilleros. They were looking and shouting 
and waving their arms and making sudden gestures. 
There was a chaos of terrible sound. 

The bull was now against the barrier off across the 
arena. He was standing alert and watchful with head 
erect. It seemed to me as if he were looking across 
over the sand at the shouting people. He was perhaps 
trying to understand, trying to fathom the meaning of it 
all. It might be that the consciousness of coming death 
had dawned upon him. He was to die out here in the 
glare and brightness of the tumult. He was to be killed 
by quick-moving things that evaded him, and melted before 
him, and still that were always by his side, with him, and 
in front of him ! 

Slowly he galloped forward, and the matador approached 
and stood, facing him. In one hand he carried his muleta — 
red doth — in the other his sword. The crisis in the fight 
had come. 

The blade of the matador's sword flashed sharply in 
the sun as he pointed it straight at the bull. To give the death-blow he had to strike down and deep through the 
neck to the heart. He had to strike the bull in front as 
it nished upon him. Should he step to the side and 
strike, it would be considered unfair — a foul blow. The 
people would curse him and execrate him. They would 
call him " asesino ! " They would hoot him out of the 
arena. He must strike the bull fair — in front ! The place 
to strike on the neck of the bull was a spot something 
over an inch in width and about two and a half inches 
long. The matador must find it with the point of his 
sword as the bull thundered upon him. A half inch too 
far to the right or left would make the stroke worse than 
useless. The bull would be but the more enraged. 

He waved his red cloth — ^and the bull came on. But 
the matador stepped deftly aside. There had not been a 
favourable opening. The time was not yet. 

Ag^n the bull came on. And again. 

Now. The bull and the man came together and I saw 
the blade of the sword flash as lightning. Whether it had 
gone home or not I could not for the instant tell. The 
rush of the bull and the lunge of the matador and the 
lightning-flash of the sword seemed to the eye but as one 
movement. 

I saw the matador walking slowly towards the barrier. 
The people were standing, cheering him, and he was bow- 
ing. His sword was no longer in his hand. Men were 
throwing down their hats to him. Women and children 
and every one were cheering him. 

By this time the bull was in another part of the arena. 
It had followed the waving of a cape after the matador 
had struck it. I could just make out the hilt of the sword — showing on the top of the neck of the bull. The 
blow had gone home. But so quickly had the matador to 
move to avoid the horns of the bull — as he thrust down 
through its neck — ^that he had to let the sword go from 
his hand. 

The end had come. The bull stopped, staggered, and 
fell. A crowd of toreros came up around it and a 
puntillero bent down and gave it the finishing stroke. 
And the trumpets sounded again throughout the arena. 
And there was a quick ringing of bells as three harnessed 
mules were driven into the arena and across the arena to 
where the bull lay — dead. The driver made fast the horns 
of the bull and it was dragged out amid innumerable 
shouts and blasts of trumpets and the bowing of the 
matador, who was now walking quickly around by the 
barrier, his reddened sword in his hand, responding to the 
calls and shouts and cheers. 

The first act of the drama was over. And though 
the toreros took their lives in their hands — bravely facing 
death — I was sorry for the bull. I did not feel as I 
thought I should feel before coming to the fight — or as I 
had felt at the beginning of it. I admitted to myself that 
the toreros had to execute a difiicult and most perilous 
task : — that the human actors in the sport — or tragedy — 
were in no sense cowards. But the bull was so brave and 
so game, and there were so many against it Thousands 
against it. However brave and game it might be there 
was nothing for it in the end but death. 

It had to reckon with invincibility. 



Over an hour had passed, and the fourth bull came 
out of the toril and into the arena. Eight bulls had to 
come out in all. Three had ah*eady made sport and 
fallen. All had died game — charging the matador. 

By this time I was hoping that a bull would kill a 
man. My sympathies had gone over now altogether to 
the side of the bulls. The ingenuity of the toreros had 
at last become monotonous to me. They were fine, brave 
fellows, but they were too skilful. 

Perhaps I might have felt differently if the bulls were 
not so game. Had they got afi-aid, or shirked the fight, 
I might not have minded so much their being killed. 
But to see them fight bravely, one after another, till they 
fell dying, made me wish that they could kill in turn. 
In the great reckoning of things one life has much the 
same value as another. And there is a fine magnetism 
about the thing that dies game. 

The bull that was now in the arena was branded on 
the side with a number — 89. I saw the number plainly 
as it dashed over close to where I was sitting. It was a 
small bull — but the most active and supple of them all. 
It boimded and leaped about like a panther. 

A banderillero got in front of it to try and plant a 
dart in its neck. He missed — and as he turned to run 
the bull turned also. A chulo darted across and gave a 
quick, sharp fling of his cape in front of it as it followed 
the banderillere^ But No. 89 was not to ^ baulked. 
He followed the bandeiiUero who was flying for his life 
across the arena to the barrier. No. 89 was gaining on 
him at every bound. 

It seemed impossible for the man to escape. The bull 
was going to get him ! 
The man was now about fifteen yards from the barrier. 
The horns of the bull were touching him. He was done 
for. 

But he made a sudden spurt — reached the barrier — 
and was just half leaping half scaling it when the bull 
struck terribly with its horns, smashing and splintering 
the wood of the barrier just under the man's body. Bull 
and man came up into the air at the same time, but the 
bull fell back on the arena side of the barrier, whilst the 
man fell over on the side towards the spectators. It was 
the most exciting thing that had happened yet. Every one 
cheered. 

Things went on for a time till at last more by accident 
than anything else a banderillero managed to plant a dart 
in his neck. And then the matador came out to kill him. 
He waved his red cloth, but No. 89 was too wily to come 
as he was wanted to come. He made a sudden, swift 
detour and charged from one side. The matador got out 
of his way and faced him again, but the movements of the 
gallant little bull were so quick and elusive that it was 
impossible for the matador to aim the thrust of his sword 
for the vital point. The bull fronted him— a hurtling, 
quick-moving, compact mass. 

The bull lunged and the matador lunged. 

In ! The sword was in, but it had gone too far to 
the side. The matador was running off now to the 
barrier to get another sword. The little bull was rushing on its way, quicker and more ferocious than ever. The  sword had not reached the vital place. It was only a goad 
to him. 

The people were shouting maledictions upon the 
matador. The stroke was bad — was no good — ^he had no 
right to be a matador ! The meaning of what they were 
shouting was plain. They were reviling the man who 
had taken his life in his hand. 

** Malo matador 1 Malo matador ! Malo mata- 
dor!" 

The meaning of the shouts was not to be mistaken. 

He planted another sword in the bull. This time too 
much to the left. And I thought the people would go 
mad. '^ Malo ! Malo ! " sounded all over the arena. 
No. 89 was now plunging round the arena with two 
swords in him. 

I felt sorry for both the man and the bull. And I 
wished that the bull could get in amongst the people — 
the people who were yelling " Malo ! " 

The trumpets now sounded and blared over the arena. . 
This time their meaning was one of blame for the matador. 
The sound of the trumpets meant that it was time that 
the bull was killed — that the matador was neither sure nor 
quick. 

The matador leaned against the barrier. He looked 
crestfallen. This was his first big bull-fight — his first real 
chance. And the shouting of " Malo ! Malo I '* meant 
that he would never get such a chance again. It meant 
that his livelihood was gone. Never agun would he be 
allowed to fight in the ring in Seville. The yelling 
people were as merciless to him as they were to the bulls. 

A man, to please them, had to be strong and sure, and — 
above all — ^to have luck. 

Two tame bulls were brought into the arena. They 
had big bells round their necks, and they were brought in 
so as to help to get the little bull from the arena. The 
fate of No. 89 was that he was to be killed outside. He 
had fought gallantly for his Ufe, but there was only death 
for him in the end. And his victory in the arena meant 
ruin for the matador, who was still leaning against the 
barrier. 

In times of stress kind comes to kind, even though 
circumstances are against the meeting. The enraged, 
wild bull at first tried to gore the tame bulls. But they 
paid no heed to him. They only ran round the arena 
with the bells round their necks — clanging. And in the 
end the wild bull joined with them. 

At last the three of them passed from the arena out 
through the door of the toril. 

Now came the picadores — mounted toreros. They 
galloped around, armed with long pikes. As yet they 
had taken no part in the fighting. But when the fifth 
bull came out of the toril they appeared in the arena. 

They were not well mounted. Their horses were old 
and worn, and each had a patch of canvas over one eye. 
This was so that it could be urged up to the bull on its 
blind side. 

A picador galloped up to the bull and prodded him 
with the pike. The bull turned and — in a flash — over- 
threw horse and rider. The man managed to clear himself 

out of the saddle as the horse was falling. The horse was 
kiUed. 

This bull killed three horses before the matador 
advanced upon it. He w&s a young, good-looking 
fellow, this matador. His face was brave and hard. 
This was his first big bull-fight also, and I was wondering 
how he would do. His name was Jos6 Campos (Campitos). 
Campitos was the name he had chosen as a torero. 

He killed the bull at a stroke. 

A diversion was created during the fight with the 
next bull. A boy of about seventeen — one of the 
spectators — slipped past the guards, climbed the barrier, 
and was in the arena. He ran over to where the bull 
was standing, watching, with its head lowered. He 
passed in between it and a picador and drew its attention. 

The bull charged the boy — ^and caught him — ^and 
tossed him. But the boy fell on his feet, unhurt, like a 
cat. 

Now he faced the bull, and when the bull charged him 
again he evaded him as skilfully as any torero. But at 
the next charge he was caught and tossed again. He fell 
in the same manner as before — ^unhurt ! 

All this happened before any one could interfere — the 
spectators cheering madly. Here was a future matador ! 
Here was one who in time would become a great torero ! 

But when the bull was drawn oiF to another part of 
the arena two guards came over the barrier and arrested 
the boy. He was taken out of the ring whilst the crowd 
shouted out against the guards. 

The eighth bull was at last near to its end and the guards 
were now allowing the spectators to get over the barrier 


into the arena. It was the usual custom at the end of 
the day's fight. I got down into the arena myself and 
ran around with the rest of the people whilst the bull was 
still chaipng about. It seemed to me that I might just 
as well take a chance as any one else. But after all there 
was no real danger. The bull was too far gone. 



And here was the end of the fight — and the end of 
the day. The trumpets were sounding through the arena 
and the people were going home. Twilight was fading 
into darkness. The glare and the shade were now softened 
and made one. The vast multitude was passing away. 
The streets outside the bull-ring were packed with 
masses of slow-moving people. All talking of toros and 
matadores ! 

I walked on to the Plaza San Fernando. 


Chapter V.—VOYAGING ROUND 

I was thinking how funny the whole affair was, when 
all at once the people in the audience began to turn and 
stare at me. Campitos looked at me and laughed, and 
I laughed in turn, though I had not yet grasped the point 
of the joke. But it was soon revealed to me. I caught 
the words " Inglhs " and ** Boers " from the stage. And 
then Danino leaned over and told me that the comic 
gentlemen on the stage were telling — ^with humorous and 
wonderful additions — of the way that the Boers had beaten 
the English. At this I wisely laughed out more loudly 
than any one else — ^and the incident passed. 

After this there followed a long interval, during which 
every one talked at once. And then there came the 
bolero. The ladies who took part in it looked enticing, 
but they danced with no fire. They did not get what 
there is to be got out of the bolero. But maybe they 
were tired. I had seen the dance done much better in 
Ronda. 

What really impressed me at the cz£6 cantante was 
the unging of a boy named Josi Colorado. He sang 
malaguenas— old songs of Malaga. He just sat down on 
a chair on the stage and sang whilst a man accompanied 
him on the guitar. There was no attempt to get stage 
effect. The boy sat in a rather crouched-up position and 
gave out the song. And such a song 1 It was hundreds 
of years old and wild as the mountains of Malaga. It 
began with a sort of low croon, and then it burst suddenly 
out into an air strange and terrible. It was a song telling 
of blood and hatred and revenge. A song such as a hard 
mountain woman would sing to her son to spur him to 
avenge wrong and shame. 


We were now in the Teatro-Circo Eslava listening to 
Boccacio. We had left the caffe cantante, and had come 
to hear something of Supp6's opera. It was of immense 
size, this theatre, and for a roof it had great canvas 
awnings, which were now shrunk up tight, leaving the 
audience seated practically in the open air. The night 
was too hot to sit in an ordinary theatre. 

Boccacio I Years ago I had sung in it, and I had wanted 
to hear it here in Seville for the sake of old times. Here, 
coming from the orchestra, was the old familiar music, and 
there off on the stage the characters were living and passing 
just as they had lived and passed in the opera company to 
which I had belonged. There was Boccacio, there was 
Fiametta, there was Lambertuccio, the cooper. The only 
difference was that they were singing in Spanish whilst we 
had sung in English. But to me there was no difference. 
I knew the opera so well. I was s^ain with the opera 
company travelling from town to town. I was again 
going through the ups and down and vicissitudes that so 
often belong to the life of the players of the stage. 

The opera was over, and we were standing outside the 
theatre. The day had been intensely hot, and it was now 
pleasant and cool. Campitosj had to go off over the 
Guadalquivir to Triana. And Danitio and I walked with 
him to the entrance of the bridge crossing the river. Here 
we bade the torero good-night. And then I bade Danino 
good-night. I wanted to walk through the town alone. 

To wander alone through a strange, foreign town at 
dead of night has about it the fascination that belongs to 
darkness and mystery and danger. You have no idea of 
where you are going, or what you will meet, or what will 
happen. Some rude stranger may suddenly appear and 
request you to lend him for an indefinite period all the 
money you chance to have in your possession. Or some 
still ruder stranger may knock you on the head first and 
borrow your wealth afterwards. 

On these nocturnal explorations it is as well for you 
to be armed — ^and to be ready — and, above all, to take 
no heed of passing, polite people who wish to enter into 
conversation with you. Just go on, and look round — and 
be ready I And all will be well. You will find yourself 
awake next morning. 

I had wandered in and out through narrow, dark 
streets till I found myself in the Plaza del Museo. I 
knew it by the statue of Murillo that stood up aloft in 
the centre of it. I could just make out the figure through 
the darkness. Murillo, the great painter ! 

I walked towards a man who was sitting on a bench. 
Near him a lamp was burning. He sat listless and still, 
almost as if the life had left him. At once I knew what 
was the matter with him. He was a man alone and 
penniless and without friends. He was not a beggar or 
he would have asked me for something as I stood looking 
at him. He was just a man who had gone under — who 
had gone down in the world. One of the outcasts of 
Seville. 

ly myself, had sat in just such a way, listless and stiU, 
as this man was sitting now. I had sat in a great town, 
hungry, tired out, forlorn, and alone. And a man had 
come up, given me a coin, and passed on without saying 
a word. And I handed this man in Seville a coin and 
passed on across the plaza. It was but as the coin that 
had been given to me years before. I had recognised my 
debt to the stranger. 

Cruel and cold fools say that if a man is hard up it is 
his own fault. But this is only the saying of those who 
are at once ignorant and cowardly. Circumstances may 
force the mightiest man to the gutter. If I had my way 
I would put all men through the mill. I would make all 
men pass through the fine, stern test of hunger and cold 
and loneliness. Then they would know something of the 
real meaning of life. They would know enough not to 
condemn. 

This lonely man here at night in the plaza might 
have had it in him to be great, even as Murillo was 
great — Murillo, the painter, to whose honour a statue had 
been erected. Or he might have had it in him to be a 
great captain-in-arms — or a great administrator. Who 
was to know ? 

Suddenly I saw a great flame bursting up through the 
darkness. An hour had passed since I had seen the man 
in the plaza, and I had no idea now as to what part of 
Seville I was in. I had wandered aimlessly along, taking 
no note as to the direction in which I was going. 

A fire had broken out in the town. The shine of the 
great flame was filling the air. I hurried along towards 
it, and soon I was joined by others who were hurrying 
along. 

On we went together through the streets till at last we 
came out into the open of a plaza. It was the Plaza San 
Fernando — ^there were the palms ! And across it we could 
see a house in flames. 

The shadows were deep and dark in the plaza as I ran 
across. I fell over a seat in the scramble, but I was up 
quick, and in a moment I was standing with the crowd in 
front of the burning house. It was an inn, and it stood 
ofi^in a small street which ran directly off^ from the plaza. 
Already the fire had well hold of it. It was crackling and 
burning and flaming away. Just over the burning house 
was the word **Tintores" in big letters. The word 
shone out steadily in the midst of the redness and the 
shining of the flames, and somehow attracted the eye more 
than did the house itself. It may have been the name of 
the street. The word looked so strange standing out in 
the flames. 

It was now something after two in the morning. 

The street was narrow and it concentrated the heat so 
that it was impossible to go up it. We just stood at the 
edge of the plaza and looked at the flames. I listened to 
the excited talk around me in the hope of hearing English 
spoken. I wanted to make a suggestion, or to do something, 
or to ask if there were any one in the burning inn. But 
I heard no word I could understand. 

No one was doing anything but talking, and pointing 
out and shouting. There were no firemen about nor no 
sign of any coming. And there seemed to be no water 
around/ and no attempt to get any. ** Agua ! " I exclaimed 
to a man who was standing close up against me. " Agua ! " 
He looked at me and shook his head. •* No agua," he 
said. And so there was no water and no attempt to do 
anything. And if there had been any wind going, all the 
houses extending from the street and along one side of the 
plaza would have been burned down. 

I had never seen such a thing before. This was 
indeed the working out of the idea of mafiana with a 
vengeance. Nobody seemed to care. They were only 
curious. 

In fact, the only people who showed any sign of 
activity were a few watchmen who were standing just in 
front of the crowd. They were armed with short lances, 
and every now and then one of them would turn and 
push against the crowd with the stock of his lance. They 
wished to show their authority by keeping the people 
back. But they took no interest in the fire — ^as far as the 
putting of it out was concerned. They were merely there 
to keep order amongst the spectators. 

A half an hour passed and then a fire bell began to 
ring solemnly from out of the darkness across the plaza. 
One could have laughed biit for the fact of the danger. 
A fire bell ringing out after the fire had been going half 
an hour ! 

After nearly another half-hour T heard the clattering 
of the hoofs of horses. Surely it was not possible that 
the firemen were coming now ! Yes, they were, for along 
came a small engine and three firemen. And now the 
watchmen performed wonderful deeds of energy. They 
dashed and jumped around, and rattled the butts of their 
lances on the stones, and pushed and shoved to get the 
crowd somewhere. Where, I don*t know. It was 
amusing. I thought they were going to eat us. Even 
after we had divided to let the engine pass these watch- 
men performed their deeds of energy. I was disgusted. 
And I came near to punching one of them. He had 
tried to shove me through the wall of a house. 

Ah I Now we were getting there ! A fireman was 
actually coupling the hose. But the fire itself was now 
getting into a rather parlous condition. It had gutted the 
inn and was dying down of itself. If the firemen were 
not quick it would be out before they could do anything. 

At last ! The nozzle at the end of the hose was 
pointed at the dying flames and the tap was turned oru 
And every one became breathless. The crucial instant had 
arrived. 

But nothing happened. The nozzle was simply as a 
gun that would not go ofF. There was no water after 
aUI 

But wait — ^hold on ! There was water. A small, 
half-spurting stream came forth. And the crowd cheered 
— ^positively cheered — ^as the fireman valorously directed 
the feeble jet of water on to the almost dead fire. 

I came away. 

I dropped into the Museo Provincial to look at the 
pictures. But to be quite frank • I can never appreciate 
pictures in museums. There are always too many of them, 
and they are too close together. One kills the other. If 
a strong picture could be seen by itself in a great hall then 
it would be effective. But to see a couple of hundred 
pictures — however great — in a museum is a weariness and 
a puzzlement. You are supposed to be profoundly im- 
pressed, but really you are only tired when it is all over. 
One of the terrible experiences of my life was the going 
through the Louvre in Paris. Genius is very well, but it 
goes best in homoeopathic doses. It is quite enough to 
tackle the work of one genius at a time. 

I was looking round the museum when an attendant 
came up to me and bowed in a most polite manner. I 
bowed in return, and then he spoke to me at length in 
quick, fluent Spanish. I replied in English, Again he 
spoke in Spanish and again I replied in English. Then he 
took refuge in the French affected by guides and waiters. 
I knew it by its sound. 

I replied again in English. And then the attendant 
had recourse to a more primitive method of conveying 
ideas. He made signs. And at last I got his meaning. 
He wanted to show me round and explain the pictures ! 
He wanted to be my guide and mentor generally for the 
modest consideration of a couple of pesetas. 

He made it clear to me that he wanted a couple of 
pesetas for showing me round, but he failed to make it 
quite so clear how he was going to explain the pictures. 
The situation had its humour. Here was I with eyes 
to look at the pictures, and here was a man who couldn*t 
speak my language and who wanted to explain everything 
for a consideration. 

I suppose he had to make his living. 

The barbers in Seville are genuine artists. Well 
might they be glorified by music and song. There is 
good reason for it. They are the deftest and lightest 
and easiest shavers I ever sat under. All you have to do 
is to go into a barber's shop, sit in the chair, and wait 
and dream. And lo ! you are shaved. You suffer none 
of the harsh scrubbing and kneading of the face that you 
suffer in England. The barber gently lathers you with 
a cool, refreshing lather, and then there comes the gentle 
gliding of the razor. You can hardly feel it as it skims 
smoothly down and across your face. To be shaved in 
Seville is indeed a dream. It is a thing to be lived for. 
I would travel far to be shaved as I have been shaved 
here in this sunny town. 

The barbers' shops are mainly to be found along the 
narrow, winding, cool Sierpes. You come from out the 
white glare of the Plaza San Fernando, and you turn to 
the left into this delightlul street that is made narrow so 
that the blaze of the sun cannot work to the full its will 
upon you. And then you turn into a still cooler and 
still more delightful barber's shop. And you come under 
the spell of an artist. 

Barber of Seville ! Fine old barbero ! Well might 
Rossini have named after you an immortal opera ! 

Agraz ! Of all the drinks I have ever quaffed in a 
hot climate this is the most cooling and delicious. Its 
colour is a faint, pale, soft yellow. Like morning 
sunlight. It is made of the juice of grapes that are 
not yet fully ripened, and water that is well iced, 
and sugar. Its flavour is the full flavour of the natural 
grape. There is in it none of the hardness that comes 
from fermentation. Just a full, sweet, delicious, cooling 
flavour. 

It may have been that at some time or another you 
have longed for a drink that had none of the hardness or 
tang that belongs to wine or spirits or indeed to iall drinks 
that have fermented. It may be that you have dreamed 
of such a drink — that you have dreamed of some pale, 
sweet, golden, soft-flavoured nectar. If you have ever 
longed for or dreamed of such a drink you will find 
your longing or your dream realised to the full here in 
Seville. 

All you have to do is to go down the Sierpes towards 
the Plaza de la. Victoria. Go down and down till you 
come to the corner of a little street which runs off^ to the 
right from the Sierpes. At this corner you will sec a 
stout, good-natured looking Spanish woman. Near her 
in a great bell-shaped glass you will see the crushed grapes. 
The juice from them is slowly dropping into a big, cool, 
earthenware jar. Give her fifteen cfentimos and she will 

dip you out from the earthenware jar a great glass of cool 
liquid of the colour of pale gold. Taste it and you will 
be glad that the day is hot — that you are living — and 
above all that you have come to Seville. You have never 
in your life tasted anything so cool and refreshing and 
delightful, and you will never again taste it in any other 
place but Seville. 

A wonderful, cool, pale, sweet, golden, soft-flavoured 
nectar. A drink for the gods. A drink such as you 
have perhaps longed for in vain, or dreamed of. It is to 
be had here in Seville — here in this narrow, winding 
street. Agraz ! 

In Seville one is struck with the fact that before all the 
doors and all the windows there is a barrier of strong iron 
bars. As you pass along through the streets at night you 
will get glimpses through the bars of brilliantly lit-up 
patios — courtyards. It is said that the Spaniard got the 
idea of the patio from the Moors. In the patios the people 
of the house sit and talk when the heat of the day has gone 
down. Here are palms and beautiful flowers. And often 
a fountain is playing in the middle of it. 

It is pleasant to get a glimpse of such a place when you 
are going along a narrow, ill-paved street. It refreshes 
and cheers one up. The Sevillanos don't bother themselves 
much about their streets. If there is a hole in the roadway 
a man is supposed to know enough to walk— or feel his 
way— around it. 

At night as you go along you will often see a young 
man standing outside the iron bars at a window and looking 
upwards. You mightn't believe it exactly — but, well, 
this young man is making love. You will see as you go 
past — ^high up above him, on the other side of the bars-— 
his lady-love. As you pass by you must only use the corner 
of your eye in taking in the scene. To turn- and look 
round would be considered intrusive, and might cause the 
Spanish Romeo to get excited. 

The FiLbrica de Tab^cos is a great building at once 
square and picturesque. In it are employed between four 
and five thousand of the women of Seville. All the day 
long they work, rolling and twisting and making cigars 
and cigarettes. 

This is a workshop that was erected by builders who were 
possessed of a sense of the harmonious and the beautiful. 
Over its portal stands a statue of G)lumbus — the great sailor 
who gave dominion to Spain. The entrance to it is from 
the Calle de San Fernando — a broad, straight, well-kept 
road along which the women pass to and from their 
work. 

The women sit working here at tables in the long, 
dim rooms. All sorts of women. Old and young and 
beautiful and plain. And women with little babies. You 
will see a mother rocking a cradle gently and at the same 
time working. Or you will see a mother hushing a child to 
sleep in her arms. These women must at once attend to 
the duties of maternity and to the necessity of earning a 
living. 

At the end of each long, dim room one notices the soft 
shining of light. It is from an altar upon which candles 
arc burning, and upon which there are always fresh, beauti- 
ful flowers. The women put them there. Before these 
altars they genuflect as they pass, or they stop and pray 
before the Virgin. 

Many people come to see them as they are at their 
work. On the day that I was there two Spanish officers 
called. One of them was a cavalryman — a fine, big, stalwart 
fellow with a frank face. In the courtyard below we 
exchanged bows and salutations. And then we went on 
through the long, dim rooms and across small, cool patios 
and past altars where lights were shining. As we passed 
the altars we raised our hats and bowed. 

I had never seen so many women together before. All 
of them were at the same time busy at their work and talk- 
ing and looking up at us as we passed. And we came at last 
to a patio from which the long rooms ran out in many 
directions. It was as if one were standing in a centre of 
light from which ran many long, dim roads. And these 
roads were all filled with the faces of women. And at the 
end of each of the roads could be seen a soft gleam ot 
light — the altar. And the faces of the women were all 
turned towards the centre of light at the patio. From all 
directions. And the eye followed the faces, and followed 
the faces till they were lost in the dimness of the rooms 
and had become blent with the soft light of the altars at 
the end. It was as if one were looking into the faces of 
aU the women of the world. Women who were working 
in a strange place of half gloom. The eflfect upon one 
standing here in the patio was strange and not to be 
described. You were looking upon many women, and still 
the subtle woman-atmosphere was gone. They were just 
workers in a strange place. 

I passed from the patio and was going along one of 
the rooms when I noticed a beautiful dark-haired woman 
with blue eyes. Sometimes Spanish women have blue 
eyes. She was fastening up bundles of finished cigarettes, 
and on the table close to her was sitting a child about 
eighteen months old. The child was fair haired and had 
blue eyes. It might have been a little English child. It 
was her little boy, and I stopped and spoke to him — and 
to her. She did not understand what I was trying to say, 
but she smiled, and the child tried to snatch the bundle 
she held in her hand. I asked Danino who she might be. 
He shrugged his shoulders. She was — ^well, she was a 
cigarrera of Seville ! Only a cigarrera. But a beautiful 
woman 1 A beautiful, dark-haired woman with blue eyes. 
I thought of her long after I had left the factory. It was 
so like life. One sees a face in passing — a face never to 
be seen agsun. 

Although there were so many workers here in the 
great factory, the general effect was one of quiet. There 
was no loud noise. And when I went back again to the 
patio it seemed almost as if the thousands of women were 
working in silence. And the altar lights gave to the 
whole scene a dignity. 

The cathedral in Seville is wonderful. It brings to 
the mind a sense of distance and vagueness and immense- 
ness. And of awe and profound mystery. Surely the 
builders of it laid together and shaped and fashioned its 


great stones with the idea in their minds of the grandeur 
and glory of God. Surely were the workers men imbued 
with deep reverence for sacred and holy things. They 
expressed their faith in stone and aisle and nave and 
transept and arch. It was the expression of their concep- 
tion of the Infinite — this vast cathedral. This profound 
place. 

To stand in it made one realise to the full the genius 
and power and fsuth and imagination of the men of old 
It was a work greater far than any work of art that could 
be fashioned by the single hand of the mightiest genius. 
There was no mark of egotism in this stupendous and 
glorious blend of craftsmanship. Individualities were 
lost in the triumph of attaining to the absolute expression 
of the idea. All the workers, from the one who designed 
to the one who helped to lift the stones, were filled with 
the same purpose — to express the wonder of God. Fsuth 
was in their lives. And only such men could do such work. 

True, a place as big and as vast might be built now. 
But it would not have the meaning. The magic and 
power of a work of art lies in a far subtler thing than the 
most subtle drawing and blending of lines, or in the deftest 
skill in the placing of masses for effect. It lies in the 
mind and soul of the worker. The men of the present 
have lost the chastening power of that fine fear of the 
Sublime that gave the soul and the wonder to the art of 
old. 

Standing here in the half gloom I thought of how 
much the men of modern dmes had lost. It seemed to 
me, in this vast place, that surely we must have gone 
back from the time when this cathedral grew from the 
hands of its workers. We were not as these men. We 
had gone back to an ignoble! barbarism- We now 
worshipped that false, surface god — Materialism. 

The men who had built this place knew of the inner 
meaning of the radiant and glorious symbol of religion. 
They knew of the art and of the mystery of life. Five 
hundred years 1 What was it in the time of the life of 
the world ? Nothing. It had come and gone since the 
beginning of the building of this cathedral. It was that 
time since the architects had come with their plans — men 
whose names were now unknown. Five hundred years, 
and even more, had often marked the length of a back- 
ward move in the progress of man 1 

These thoughts were in my mind as I looked forth 
through thehalf gloom of the]cathedral — forth intojthevast- 
ness. A soft, cool light cameTromj^high^up aloft^through 
windows stained curiously and beautifully. It fell upon 
and softly illumed an altar and a picture of a guardian 
angel by Murillo. How beautiful was the picture ! Here 
in the cool, half light of this grand Gothic church one 
might understand and feel something of the genius of the 
great painter. The picture of the angel was^fshining 
softly as might shine a great, strange, wonderful gem 
lying afar ofF in some deep crypt. 

And now the tones of an organ swelled forth through 
the cathedral. Through aisle, through nave, through 
transept, round and round through the still, vast, rising 
columns, up through the far, high arches, along through 
many distances the tones swelled, filling the vast, strange 
solemnness. And there arose from a choir clear voices. 
It was the celebration of Mass. And I went and knelt 
reverently as others were kneeling — as one might kneel 
who was possessed of any soul or feeling for the wonderful 
and beautiful. The sonorous Latin words came forth 
from the choir. As I knelt I could feel their inner 
meaning. I was at one with the religious men of old — 
the men who had long gone back to dust — ^the men who 
were dead, but who had built this living, solemn, wonderful 
church. 

Chapter VI. SCALING MULEY HASSAN 

I WAS awakened by a loud knocking on the door. Up I 
got and opened it, and before me a man stood with a light. 
** Cuatro " (four), he said in the deep Spanish voice. And 
he was gone. 

And then I remembered it all. It was four o*clock in 
the morning — as dark as pitch — and to-day was the day 
that I had to begin to tackle the Cerro de Mulhacen 
(Muley Hassan), the highest mountain in Spain— and only 
practicable for climbing in summer. 

I had only had two hours sleep and the foolishness gene- 
rally of climbing mountains struck me forcibly. To tramp 
along a good road was all right, but for a man to voluntarily 
climb a high mountain when no one was after him — ^well, 
to say the least, it was an uncalled-for exercise. And I 
was half determined to go back to my needed and well- 
earned repose. The night before I had been gazing on 
the sights of Granada with Bryson and Halley and the 
indomitable Brown. 

But I was in for it. I couldn't go back. I had en- 
gaged the guide. He was to call for me this morning. 

Down 1 went into the office and inquired for Fer- 
nando — ^the guide. To my joy I was informed through a 
sort of compound gesture that he had not yet arrived. I 
pretended to be much annoyed. " Cuatro 1 '* I exclaimed 
indignantly. " Why no Fernando ? " And then I retired 
quickly upstairs. As I went to bed again I must confess 
that I hoped that Fernando would forget the appointment, 
or work the mafiana act, or get lost, or do something or 
another that was intelligent 

I was asleep and dreaming of the Strand when again 
I was knocked into wakefulness. It was broad daylight 
now and I opened the door with trepidation. 

" Fernando 1 " said the man. It was the gentleman 
who had roused me up before. 

"Why— I" I exclaimed. "Why didn't Fernando 
come cuatro — four o'clock as he said he*d come ? No 
bueno ! " And as the man was departing along the cor- 
ridor I relapsed into pure, pithy Saxon about things in 
general and mountain-climbing in particular. 

But at last I was prepared and standing down under 
the great, cool elms in front of the entrance to the Hotel 
Siete Suelos. Before me] was the guide, Fernando— a tall, 
rather slight, wiry, toughened looking man with a very 
dark, intelligent face, and large dark eyes that had in them 
a curious expression. He looked wiry, but at the same 
time he gave one the impression of a man who only moved 
slowly and steadily. I had never seen the like of such a 
man before. He was not at all the Spanish type. On the 
night I had engaged him I had not paid the closest atten- 
tion to his appearance. But now I looked at him with 
sharp interest. He was to take me to the highest peak of 
the Sierra Nevada and back again in three days. As he 
stood with his long gun slung across his back he might at 
first sight have suggested an American backwoodsman 
with a touch of Indian blood in him. But the suggestion 
would be misleading. For one thing he had not the alert- 
ness of the man of the West. And there were other 
points of difference too subtle to describe. However, he 
looked a man who was absolutely to be depended upon. 
He had the calmness and the eye of one who knows what 
he knows. He looked Eastern. He had the gravity and 
self-poise of the Moor. Indeed, Fernando was one of the 
strangest-looking men I had ever seen. He was a man I 
could not grasp or understand. But he was a man upon 
whom I could depend. He had been sent to me by Mr. 
Davenhill, the English consul. 

OfF we started with the two mules and the driver, 
Toma, a young fellow from a village near by. We had 
also with us Fernando*s dog — ^Tula, a pointer. Food for 
three days, and blankets and sheepskins to lie on, and fodder 
were packed on the mules — strong, serviceable, quiet- 
looking animals. I walked between the mules whilst 
Fernando went in front with his dog, and Toma followed 
behind. We passed along the road to the left till we were 
out of the Alhambra Park. 

We were now at the bottom of the road, and I was 
feeling distinctly better. I was no longer dwelling upon 
my foolishness in tackling the mountain. The fresh, cool, 
beautiful air of the morning began to inspire me. It was 
not such a great feat after all, I thought — only a small 
matter of between eleven and twelve thousand feet. There 
were men who would have eaten Muley Hassan, so to 
speak. Fellows who tackled mountains for the simple 
reason that they were high and difficult. And I 
began to think of the glorious and wonderful scenery 
that I would see in the course of the day. At this  time I must confess that I was going along a fine broad road. 

We turned — and there were the mountsuns 1 " Pico 
de Vcleta," said Fernando to me, pointing to the highest. 
We were to sleep on the slope of the peak that night 

It was a grand-looking mountain — but it looked a 
good many miles away I Indeed, it seemed to me as if it 
might have been up in the moon. It had such a distant 
clearness about it. And on it were great shining spaces of 
snow. It was only thirty-five feet lower than Muley 
Hassan, which lay off behind it, and which we could 
not see. 

At the outside of the town Fernando stopped at a 
Uttle wineshop. The three of us left the mules outside 
and went in to get a morning reviver of aguardiente. The 
woman who kept the wineshop asked Fernando a lot of 
questions about the "Inglis" — myself. When Fernando 
spoke the words ** Muley Hassan/* it seemed to my 
observant eye as if she looked at me a bit strangely, and 
smiled ever so fsdntly. Here Fernando got a skin filled 
with wine for himself and Toma, and I got a small bottle 
of aguardiente. 

We were outside the town now and facing on towards 
the distant clearness of the Picacho de Veleta. To me it 
looked like some far-ofF, starry ideal — something that 
wanted a lot of reaching. But I felt well enough — in the 
coolish morning air. It was only coolish now. Soon it 
would be blazing hot. And the thing was to make hay — 
or rather pace — ^before the sun got properly wakened up. 
In the south of Sp^n in the summer the sun is a force 
to be reckoned with. 
We had not gone a great way before Fernando stopped 
one of the mules alongside a big stone and signed for me 
to climb up on to its back. But I politely declined. In 
the jfirst place I was not at all sure that I could stick on 
the mule's back — an animal that went by the name of 
Repertore. Repertore looked quiet enough, but to my 
eye there was, beneath his quietude of aspect, an expression 
of extreme pessimism and dislike of things in general. He 
might play all sorts of games with me once I was on his 
back. So I decided to trust to my own legs. Walking 
was good for me, and, besides, I thought I might as well 
show these Spaniards how well an Englishman could walk ! 
I secretly determined not to get on a mule's back during 
the whole of the three days. 

Without more ado Fernando got on to the back of 
the mule himself, and we plodded along merrily towards 
the far distant peak. And there was nothing worth 
chronicling till another half hour had passed. It was'then 
that Toma stopped the mule he was driving and signed 
for me to jump up and take it easy. But again I politely 
declined, and Toma quickly followed the example of 
Fernando by getting on to the back of Turiddu — the 
other mule. 

We must now have presented a most humorous 
spectacle from the Spanish point of view, for every one 
who passed us grinned broadly. The fact of the financier 
of the expedition walking whilst the guide and the driver 
rode, evidently seemed to them an anomaly. And I must 
confess that as the time passed and the sun got hotter, it 
seemed a bit of an anomaly to myself — an anomaly shorn 
of humour. Still, I had made up my mind to walk. I had determined to show them what an Englishman could 

All at once the sun seemed to blaze out like a furnace. 
We had got into the Sierras and had entered into a dip 
between two far-away mountains. As near as I could 
make out it was these mountains that caused the heat by 
stopping the breeze from getting to us. The sudden 
)ump up of the heat was one of the most curious things I 
had ever known. We seemed to pass into the intense 
heat in an instant. There may have been some other 
explanation for it than the one I have suggested, but at 
the time there was little use in requiring involved explana- 
tions from Fernando. As a matter of fact neither he nor 
Toma knew a word of English. 

Here the scenery was beautiful, but for me its beauty 
was tempered too much with the heat of the sun. I 
seemed to be walking in the middle of a furnace. 

To properly appreciate the beautiful, one must first of 
all feel comfortable. And I can't say I felt comfortable. 
I was in a rain of perspiration. And ahead of me 
Fernando was sitting on the mule, looking calm and cool 
and collected. Over his head he held an umbrella to shade 
lumself from the rays of the sun. He had two umbrellas, 
one of which he had offered me some time before — but I 
had declined it. And it was now strongly borne upon me 
that his asking me to ride on the mule in the first place 
was no mere empty politeness. He knew how I was 
going to feel much better than I did. This working up a 
steady incline in the intense heat was too much of the 
nature of work to suit me. And I began to gaze on the 
beauty of the scenery with a jaundiced eye. I was wishing 
Fernando would again ask me to get up on the mule« 
But he didn't. He seemed to be going on in a sort of a 
comfortable half doze. I would have asked to be let get 
up myself, but I felt rather ashamed. It seemed rather 
like giving in 1 And I looked forward towards the Pico 
de Veleta. But I could not see it. It had gone. Where 
I neither knew nor cared. 

^^ Fernando I " I shouted at last. And in a moment 
he was down off the back of Repertore, and in another 
moment I was up on the back of Repertore, seated com- 
fortably on a bag of fodder with an umbreUa over my 
head. Fernando got up on Turiddu and Toma stationed 
himself behind Repertore and persuaded him gently 
along. 

I had never ridden a mule before, and I was surprised 
to find how easy it was. Repertore had the slow, easy 
motion of a ssuling ship going before a fiur» moderate 
wind. 

It was now that the full glory of the beauty of the 
Sierra Nevada broke in upon me. I could take it in in 
huge draughts from the back of Repertore. 

The incline of the ascent became sharper, and off in 
the distance behind I could see Granada lying white and 
shining at the foot of the mount^dns. On the hills to the 
right I could make out the green of the trees round the 
Alhambra. 

We were just about to enter a wide gorge when 
Fernando dismounted from Turiddu and came towards 
me. He tried to tell me something, but I understood 
him no more than the dead. And then we stopped for a 
moment and he consulted with Toma. Toma then tried 
to tell me this something, but I understood him as little 
as I did Fernando. I thought that they were trying to tell 
me something interesting about the scenery. But it turned 
out that they were not. They were concerned in my 
welfare and safety, though I did not know it at the time. 
As we were going along the side of the gorge it struck 
me that my days of active service would be suddenly cut 
short if Repertore were to make a slip. I would go hurt- 
ling down several hundred feet and the life would be 
knocked clean out of me long before I got to the bottom. 
And what added vividness to my thoughts concerning the 
matter was the fact that Repertore had taken a fancy to 
walking on the very, very edge of the narrow path. I 
tried to rein him away. But he would persist. He was 
sure-footed, of course, but even a mule will sometimes 
slip. I got nervous, and for a moment I thought the best 
thing I could do would be to dismount and walk. But I 
had had a surfeit of walking, and the path was so narrow 
that I hardly liked to chance jumping off. Repertore was 
going absolutely along the edge and I didn't like to dis- 
turb him. Here I was sitting straddle-wise on a mule, in 
a most dangerous place, and if it slipped I would have the 
weight of it on the top of me down the side of the gorge 
helping me in my sudden smashing into the next world ! 
Straddle-wise I Why couldn't I turn and sit sideways 
out from the edge of the abyss, so that if the mule slipped 
I should have a strong chance of falling forward on the 
path whilst Repertore negotiated his downward flight 
alone ? No sooner thought of than acted upon. I 
worked my leg over to my left cautiously whilst Repertore 
was stepping more on the edge of the path than usual. 

Indeed^ at times it seemed as if half the brute's hoofs 
protruded out over the edge when he set them down. 

When I had got myself safely round I heard Fernando 
say : " Bueno, Seflor." He was a few yards behind me, 
and when I turned my head slowly to look at him he was 
nodding approval and sitting on his mule as I was sitting 
now on mine. Toma was walking between us. And 
then the whole thing flashed upon me. He and Toma 
had been trying to tell me to sit like this before we entered 
into the gorge. Not knowing a word of Spanish had in 
this instance been dangerous. 

We were far away from the gorge now and the heat 
of the sun was roasting. It bore down through the 
umbrella I carried and through my pith helmet and 
turned my head to fire. We were up now I should 
think about six thousand feet, and one would have 
thought it would have got cooler. But such was not 
the case. It got hotter and hotter. I could feel the 
skin crackling on my face. Now and then I thought 
of Toma, who was going on foot behind me, urging 
Repertore along. In a vague way I wondered how he 
contrived to manage at all. But I suppose he was used 
to the heat and to the mountains. 

I would not have got oflF the back of Repertore now 
for a king's ransom. 

We stopped under the shadow of a great rock to get 
something to eat. Never was shade more refreshing. 
To recline in it was like reclining in some cool, delightful 
hfiaven. The beauty and charm of the shade of this rock 
far surpassed the beauty and charm of the whole of the 
Sierra Nevada lumped up together. 
Repertore and Turiddu began to munch industriously 
at the surrounding herbage. And Fernando and Toma got 
out the provisions whilst I reclined at full length and 
thought easily about nothing. 

It turned out that the hotel waiter had forgotten two 
small trifles in the putting up of my provisions. These 
trifles were a corkscrew and some salt. Fernando had 
some salt, however, and shared with me. But I had to 
dig out the cork from a bottle of Rioja with a broad- 
bladed knife — a slow operation when one is thirsty. 

After eating I had a short sleep, during which I 
dreamed of the cool green and the shade of the Alhambra. 
But the voice of Fernando calling out " Senor 1 " put a 
stop to my delightful rest and I reluctantly pulled myself 
together and climbed up on to the back of Repertore. 

Out into the sun ! We were now going at a smart 
pace along the trail. And it seemed to me as if the heat 
were dying slightly down. That we were up high I could 
tell by the feel of the air in breathing. The wonder to 
me was that it could be so hot at such a height. We 
must have been up close on to eight thousand feet and 
still the heat was trying. 

At last we were well up over the snow line. The air 
was cooler. And we got to the Laguna de las Yezuas — a 
weird-looking mountain lake almost ten thousand feet up. 
We rested for a while here. Toma suggested to me by 
signs that I should go into the lake for a swim. But I 
would not have gone in on any account. Though a small 
lake, it looked weird and dark, and towards the centre of 
it the darkness turned to blackness. A place of great 
depth in the midst of an amphitheatre formed by 

mountains which were rising up all round. And on its 
bank was snow. Snow had lain here through thousands 
and thousands of years. An eternal whiteness that threw 
into the lake a sinister reflection that was gradually absorbed 
in darkness. 

No, I would not have swum in this lake. 

The breathing here was, for me, a little difficult. I 
noticed it most when I was lying down. In taking a long 
breath I felt now and then a sort of catch and a choke. 
At ten thousand feet one begins to feel the difference in 
the ain 

At this lake it was usual for people to pass the night, 
and to push on the next morning for the Picacho de Veleta, 
which was from here only a question of about four miles 
away. But we had made up our minds to get on to the 
peak that night. And so we started. 

There was no trail leading from here to the peak, and 
we had to follow Fernando, who went on ahead, looking 
out for the easiest way to ascend. He led one mule and 
Toma led the other. The ascent was too rugged and 
difficult now to ride on the mules. 

And here it was that I experienced the first real, rough 
work of the journey. And but for the fact that the air 
was cool I don't know how I would have managed. I 
began to gasp from the exertion and from the thinness of 
the air. I was in e^ery way unfitted for the climb. I was 
out of training. I had had but little sleep the night before — 
I was three stone too heavy for the kind of work — and 
lots of other things. And to make it more interesting 
still I was not wearing the right kind of shoes for climbing 
in the Sierras. I had on a pair of "ammunitions" — 

English Army shoes with steel corner tips on the heels, 
I was slipping and sliding all over the shop on these steel 
tips. What I ought to have been wearing were a pair of 
rope sandals without heels — such as Fernando and Toma 
were wearing. The shoes I had on were only good for 
tramping along roads. 

Just as I was about to drop in my tracks from fatigue 
a wonderful idea came to me — an effective, simple idea — 
an idea of genius. I made a desperate spurt upwards and 
grabbed Repertore by the tail. I was saved 1 Of course, 
the mule might launch out and kick me across the moun- 
tains, but life isn't life if one doesn't take a chance or two. 
Yes, I was saved ! Gallant, good old Repertore had too 
much work to do to think about kicking me off from him. 
He had at once to get himself up and drag me up the 
mountain. Toma was leading him .on at a smart pace. I 
envied Toma. He was used to mountains and weighed 
only about ten stone. I hadn't seen mountains for a long 
time and — well, I was close on to fourteen stone. 

I clung like a limpet to the noble Repertore, and lo 
and behold ! we were on the top. The long day's work 
was over. Here we could rest and eat and sleep and be 
thankful. There were three or four stone enclosures 
that had been built up roughly to give shelter to men and 
mules. 

For me it was a glorious moment. 1 had com- 
pleted successfully a hard day's work through the help of 
a simple, luminous idea. All day long I had been doubt- 
ing the soundness of my intelligence for undertaking the 
journey at all. But that sharp, quick idea about grabbing 
the mule's tail ! It brought back part of the respect I had 
lost for my intellect generally. I lay and chuckled about 
it, and when Fernando took me over to show me the 
Mediterranean and what he all^^ed was Africa, or some 
other continent, I still chuckled. 

As usual, there was a mist lying over the mountains. 
I have never in my life known it to fail yet. Before you 
climb a mountain you are filled with legends concerning 
the wonders that will be spread down before your gaze. 
You are told of strange, gorgeous sunsets, of sights of 
appalling magnificence. And you see nothing but a 
thin mist that effectually hides things in the distance. 
A mountain-climber must be a person blessed with fiuth 
and imagination. He must take things on trust, and 
when he gets back to the earth again he must depend 
upon skilful and artistic lying for the getting of fine, 
narrative effect. 

To me the most impressive thing about mountains is 
the surrounding silence. And one feels so alone. 

Off^ over there lay Muley Hassan — z massive, sullen- 
looking mountain. To make it and to come back here 
to the Picacho de Veleta, and back again to the Laguna de 
las Yezuas was our work for the next day. 

Here I am enforced to digress in order to correct an 
error as to the stated height of Muley Hassan. It is said 
to be only a little over 11,400 ft. above the level of the 
sea. Such is not the case. Muley Hassan is 11,700 ft. 
above the level of the sea if it be an inch. Granada is 
2500 ft., the Alhambra is 2700 ft. The aneroid used for 
these measurements had been set two days before at the 
level of the sea by the first oflicer of a P. and O. boat, and 
as every one knows P. and O. officers arc models of exactitude, respectability, and truthfulness. Even their  yarns have about them the salt of veracity. But let that 
pass. Muiey Hassan is at least 11,700 ft. above the level  of the sea. 

My reason for labouring this point is because I fail to 
see why a climber should be done out of three hundred 
feet. Scaling mountains may be a laboured kind of joke, 
but this is no joke. 

It was a little cold up here on the top of the mountain, 
but that did not bother me at all. It was otherwise, how- 
ever, with Fernando and Toma. I suppose Spaniards feel 
cold more than do Englishmen. Fernando pottered round 
with a shawl wound across his shoulders. He looked like 
a mild, calm brigand. 

Twilight was upon us by this time and Toma had 
started a fire under the shelter of a rock and had put on a 
pan, filled with snow, for the making of the coffee. He 
had brought up a small heap of snow from a drift near at 
hand and he fed the snow into the pan as it melted. And 
soon the water was boiling merrily, and the cofilee was 
made. 

It was then that I discovered that the provisions I had 
got from the hotel were hardly the best suited for the 
sustaining of one in the climbing of mountains. The 
guide's provisions were much better. At least I liked them 
much better. So we made an exchange. He ate mine, and 
I ate his. 

Just as we were finishing coffee we heard a shout, and 
Fernando went forward and came back in a few moments 
with two men. They were wild-looking fellows wearing 
shawb, and my first hope was that they were brigands. But 
they were not They were manzanilleros : — men who 
gathered manzanilla up here in the mountains — ^a delicious- 
smelling herb that seemed to me to be something Uke 
chamomile. When they had got a big enough load of it 
they would carry it down on their backs into Granada to 
sell it. One of the manzanilleros wanted to sell me some 
manzanilla for three pesetas. 

The twilight had fallen into darkness and we were all 
sitting round the brightly blazing fire. There was plenty 
of dried wood at hand to keep it going, and I felt very 
comfortable as I lay on a sheepskin. Toma was singing a 
Spanish song. After he had finished I sang a song. And 
then one of the manzanilleros sang. 

Voices sounded so strangely up here on the top of the 
mountain. It seemed as if the thinness of the air robbed 
them of the fulness of their quality. But what they 
lost that way they must have gained in carrying power. 
One felt that they rang out over the dark solitudes for 
miles and miles. 

Each of us stood up in turn before the fire as we sang. 
And the effect was odd and strange and weird. It was 
especially so when Fernando sang. His song was a sort of 
mid chant — ^perhaps coming from the time of the Moors. 
The flickering and waving of the fire threw out behind 
him a long, contorting shadow and there was an expression 
that I could not define or in any way understand in his 
face. 

Being here was perhaps the strangest experience of my 
life. The solitude and the darkness and the strange sing- 
ing, and the waving, fitful fire, and the fact of not being 
able to exchange a word with my companions, and their 
odd aspect, made altc^ether an impression on me which 
was totally unUke any I had ever received before through an 
adventurous, up and down life. Often one goes into 
strange surroundings and sees something that is but as a 
vivifying or clearing up of some buried and forgotten 
impression that one has received years before. One feds 
the shock of an awakenment. But here on this night in 
the mountains the impression I received was entirely 
strange and found no echo in the recollections of all my 
past experiences. 

We turned in. I lay on sheepskins in one of the rough 
enclosures with a blanket over me. My revolver was 
under my head, ready to my hand. In life it is always well 
to be prepared. When you are prepared nothing happens. 
Everything goes smoothly. Fernando and Toma were all 
right, but I knew nothing of the manzanilleros. 

For hours it seemed to me that I heard the voices of 
the Spaniards going in one of the other enclosures. One 
coidd hear things with such distinctness up here. I tried 
to get at the drift of what they were talking about. But 
that was, of course, impossible. And in the end I fell 
asleep. The last thing I remember was noticing how dim 
the stars looked overhead. 
In the grey of the morning we were again around the 
fire. Toma was putting snow into the pan for the making 
of the coffee. Fernando was moving about^ looking more 
like a shawled brigand than ever. And the manzanilleros 
were bringing up wood to keep the fire going. 

Whilst breakfast was being got ready I thought I 
might as well go round by the big boulders and see how 
the view was getting along. I wanted to give the scenery 
a chance to distinguish itself. But it was still modestly 
shrouded behind the thin mist. 

I turned my eyes to the East to watch the rising of 
the sun. An English-speaking, travelled, Spanish gentle- 
man, down in Granada, had told me a marvellous tale 
concerning the way the sun got to work up in the 
mountains here. He said that it wound and wound up 
spirally, like a snake. Why the sun should behave in 
such an extraordinary manner in this part of the world 
puzzled me. But knocking round a lot had taught me 
to wear the open mind in front of a traveller's yarn. 
For the thing one thought to be impossible sometimes 
turned out to be true. So I gazed in hopes to see the 
sun perform. But alas ! he came up in his usual calm, 
easy, time-honoured manner. 

After breakfast Fernando looked at my ^^ ammuni- 
tions " and decided that they were no good — " malo !" — 
for the long dimb before us. So I made an exchange 
with Toma. He put on the '^ ammunitions " and I put 
on his rope shoes. He had no climbing to do. His job 
was to take the mules back to the Laguna de las Yezuas 
and wait for us till we got back there that night. I signed 
to Fernando if it were not possible to take Repertore 
along with us. I had visions of hanging on to his tail in 
trying moments. But Fernando made me understand that 
it was not possible. And the steep sheer look of the 
ascents and descents before us bore him out. In the dis- 
tance Muley Hassan seemed to go straight up. It didn't 
seem possible to dimb it. 
But I was feeling better now and was game for any- 
thing another man was game for. And we started after 
bidding adios to the manzanilleros : — Fernando, myself and 
Tula the pointer. We had what turned out to be four- 
teen hours* work before us. But I was feeling as right as 
a nail. I suppose the work of the day before had salted 
me. 

We climbed and descended three mountains before we 
came to the foot of Muley Hassan, and after taking a 
breathing spell we began to work right up its face. I kept 
well in the steps of Fernando, and it turned out to be not 
such a hard mountain after all. Often this is the way with 
mountains that look sheer and straight from a distance. 

Just at twelve o'clock we were on the summit — six 
hours after starting from the Picacho de Veleta. We 
would have a stiff journey back to the Laguna de las 
Yezuas — ^but what did that matter ? We were on the top 
of the highest peak of the Sierra Nevada — the highest 
mountain in Spain 1 There were the ruins of some huts 
that had been built years before. Men of science had 
come here to take observations — ^had built these huts — and 
had gone. 

I walked to the edge of an immense overhanging rock 
and looked out and downwards. The view was now clear. 
The mist had rolled away. Far, far below and out from 
me stretched the grand, bare, desolate roll of the Sierra 
Nevada. Off to my left and down through an inunense 
distance I could see the shining of great waters. 

Chapter VII— IN GRANADA 

It was a great night — ^the night that Manuel de la Torres 
won five thousand pesetas in the lottery. He lived in 
the lower part of Granada and he had come up to 
the Alhambra to have a little dinner and a jollification 
generally. Manuel did not come alone. He brought his 
friends and his family to help him to celebrate the glorious 
event. 

Sounds of revelry came from the garden of the Hotel 
Siete Suelos where the party were seated at dinner. And 
there was the lucky Manuel. Santiago Jimena, the manager 
of the hotel, pointed him out to me as he sat at the head 
of a well laden table with his devoted ^mily and admirers : — 
a large, stout, jovial-looking Andalusian. He had an air 
of jollity, prosperity, and luck hovering about him. At 
the moment my eye caught him he was gazing through 
the bowl of a champagne glass — a champagne glass with 
a fizzing top. The rest of the party were domg likewise. 
They were about to drink a toast. 

Antonio, the two Miguels, Emilio, Josi, and the rest 
of the tried and trusty staff of waiters were rushing 
valorously around : — carrying bottles, opening bottles, 
carrying plates and dishes, knocking into one another, 
rushing along with this and that. and the other. G)rks were popping, and plates and knives and forks were  rattling, and shouting and laughing voices were going. 
Salvador, the head waiter, was standing at a side table  excelling himself in the fine and noble art of opening  champagne at once quickly and without losing a drop. 

Ah ! The supreme moment had come. The party 
were standing drinking the toast. They sat down and 
then there arose Manuel de la Torres. Manuel who had 
been born under a lucky star. Manuel de la Torres, the 
fortune-winner. He delivered a speech in the midst of a 
silence impressive. Antonio, the two Miguels, Emilio, 
Jose, and the rest of the tried and trusted waiting staiF 
suspended their quick, bustling labour so as to listen. 
Salvador stopped excelling himself in the opening of the 
champagne. All of us listened : — Santiago and I and 
others who had come up to gaze upon the festival. I 
cannot, of course, translate Manuel's speech. But I 
presume that it was connected with the secret of winning 
fortunes. 

At the end of his speech Manuel sat down and wiped 
his brow with his napkin in the midst of thunderous 
applause from every one — ^from onlookers, waiters, his 
party, and every one. And Salvador resumed business at 
the side table. Corks began to pop again and the tried 
and trusty staff got back to work. 

When the dinner was over the party came from the 
garden into the drawing-room to continue the revelry. 
And here it was that Santiago introduced me to Manuel. 
Manuel bowed gracefully and I bowed gracefully, and we 
shook hands. And then he introduced me to his wife, 
Seftora de la Torres, and to his friends and his Friends wives. When this ceremony was over I was given a place  of honour in the corner of the drawing-roooL Manuel  had honoured me by making me his guest. I was the only 
stranger to the party that was present. 

The jollity and gaiety again began, and Manuel's daugh- 
ter went over to the piano to play a waltz. And then every- 
body but myself began to dance. As Manuel's daughter 
played she sang, and as the people danced they called to 
each other at the top of their voices. Music and dancing 
and shouting and gaiety. In the middle of it Manuel 
stopped waltzing and came over to converse with me. 
His manner was most jovial and pleasant. He spoke as 
loudly as he could so that I might hear him through the 
noise — ^and I spoke loudly. What he was talking about I 
don't know, but it was about something pleasant. We 
were both pleased. 

Manuel left me, to go back and waltz with his wife, 
and then another gentleman came up and conversed with 
me after the same manner. When he retired another 
gentleman came to take his place, and then Manuel's wife 
came. It looked as if my conversational powers had been 
spread abroad through the drawing-room. All through 
the festival I was never at a loss for any one to converse 
with. None of them, of course, understood a word of 
what I said. But the Andalusians are a polite and kindly 
people. 

After the waltzing was over, Manuel sang a song. 
He had a good, big, jovial-sounding voice — a voice that 
just fitted him. I got up to leave the dramng-room at 
the end of the applause, as I had begun to fear that possibly 
my conversational power might act as a drag upon the g^ety and sparkle of the occasion . But the jovial Manuel  would not hear of my leaving them. I had to go back 
and sit down.  
Salvador and a couple of the waiters came in at this 
point, and in a moment champagne was going around. 
And then the Sevillana came on. The Sevillana is a dance 
typical of Andalusia. Either a woman may dance it alone 
or with a partner. 

The party sat around close to the wall of the drawing* 
room; so as to leave a space in the centre of the floor for 
the dance. And a guitar strummed out loudly, and a 
seftorita was standing in the cleared space. In her 
hands were a pair of castanets with ribands flying from 
them. She began by waving her arms in the air and 
clicking the castanets to the strumming of the guitar, 
which was played by Manuel, who sat on achair close by her. 
The tune that he was playing had a curious, abrupt lilt in 
it, and really consisted of a single phrase that was repeated 
and repeated with slight variations. I found out after- 
wards that no other tune was ever played for the Sevillana. 
This was the phrase that Manuel repeated with slight 
variations upon the guitar. The dance itself depended 
mainly for its effect upon gracefulness of movement and 
posturing. It was a gliding, supple-moving dance, and at 
first in a way it seemed at variance with the odd abrupt- 
ness of the music and the clicking of the castanets. But 
soon the eye and the ear got used to the combination of music and movements and castanets, and then it was that  one saw that the abrupt lilt of the music and the dick of 
the castanets but brought out the subtle, voluptuous points  of the dance. In the Sevillana there was none of the  wildness and fire of the bolero. It was just a smooth, 
graceful dance with a touch of the East in it. A modification perhaps of some Moorish dance of the long ago. 

After the dance was over I obliged with a song. 
Manuel would have it so. 

Twelve o'clock came and the festival was still going 
along gloriously. I thought, however, that it was time to 
retire, and I shook hands with Manuel and the rest of 
the company, and managed to make my departure. 

This was the phrase that Toma sang on the day that 
we were coming down from the Sierras after Fernando 
and I had scaled Muley Hassan. What the words were 
he sang to it I don't know, but the air sounded melancholy 
and strange through the mountains. 

It had the feeling in it of work accomplished— of 
going home. And still there was sadness in it. We had 
had three very hard days, and it was in accord with my 
mood. Toma sang it and sang it as we-, went down the 
Sierras. The music must first have been sung by men who had passed through the strange loneliness of the 
mountains. It was perhaps thousands of years old. 

Toma*s clear voice rang out this phrase as we went 
down and down. He sang it for hours. And still one 
felt no sense of monotony in listening to it. The music 
was of the time and the place and the work and the scene. 
It was born in the mountains — born, perhaps, long before 
the speech of man. An old simple phrase of music. 

He sang it till darkness came on. He sang it as we 
entered Granada. 



Often at nights I used to listen to the Spaniards as 
they sang near the fountain in the Alhambra. 

There was such individuality in their voices and in 
their songs. There is something wonderful in a fine 
human voice, that has never been trained, singing a race- 
song. Voices that are trained invariably lose their indi- 
viduality. They are made to sound as instruments sound. 
That is why one so rarely hears a beautiful voice on the 
operatic stage. One hears loud voices and sonorous voices 
and high voices and deep voices. But rarely beautiful 
voices. The individual colour of the voice is lost in the 
getting of an ear-piercing tone, or an over-loud tone. 
Nature never intended a human being to get on a stage 
and endeavour to over-shout the hard tones of instruments 
of brass. This is asking too much of the human voice. The singing of a thousand years ago must have been far finer  than it is now. 

I used to think this as I heard the Spaniards singing 
in the Alhambra. One was caught and thrilled by what 
they were singing even though one could not understand 
the words. Their voices sounded like voices. They were 
neither hard nor metallic, and still they had carrying power. 
They had not been spoiled by singing-masters. 

Usually their songs began with a long, high note. 
After the long note there came a recitative, and then the 
voice went along with an air. Generally in the air there 
was a florid, running passage that reminded one of the 
running passages in the vocal music of Handel. The 
running notes were always sang staccato. 

The song ended as it began — on a long note. 

I tried to think what the songs could mean. They 
were national songs, and national songs always have a 
significance that no mere modern songs ever can have. 

It seemed to me that the first note must have been a 
call to people in the distance because of its length and 
because it was high in the voice. The recitative must have 
been the story that the singer had to tell, the air was perhaps 
a comment upon the story or a defining of what the singer 
considered ought to be done. This, of course, was only 
conjecture, but manifestly the song had a vital and pressing 
reason for being brought into existence. Likely enough the 
leaders of the people first sang them. They were mainly 
on themes connected with war and fighting and revenge. 
Rarely were they about love. One could tell this by the 
emotions they brought up. Often the blood ran cold as one 
listened to them. In the main they were terrible songs. 

The intervals between the notes were very often 
diiFerent from those that are used in the diatonic scale. 
And besides, an effect was also got by the changing of the 
colour of the voice. 

The Spaniards used to go on singing them up to two 
and three o'clock in the morning. First one man would 
sing, and then another would sing. They always sat and 
sang in a rather crouched-up position — just as the boy 
Josi did in Seville. Around the singers there was in- 
variably a group of listeners. 

Listening to the singers through the darkness had a 
strange effect upon me. It was as if I were being told a 
moving, strange, wonderful story not by words but by 
emotions and mind*pictures. 

How cool was the shade thrown by the great elms in 
the park of the Alhambra. Down in the town of Granada 
the scorch was not to be borne. But here under the elms 
it was cool and refreshing and beautiful. And always 
there was the sound of water flowing down from the 
Sierras. A cool, soft sound. A murmuring sound going 
ever along. To sit here under the elms listening to it 
brought to one a sense of quietude. The soft running 
sound gave out an effect of stillness and silence. It was as if one were in a place of wonderful dreams. 
Here under the great elms. The air was clear and fresh 
and soft. It had warmth in it and still there was in it a 
freshness and a sense of coolness. And always there was 
the sound of the water that ran down from the Sierras. 
It was a strange, magical place. Here under the elms. 
One might dream and forget and dream and forget 
through the afternoon. A golden, wonderful place in the 
south of Spain. 

No one ever seemed to do any work but the tourists. 
They came from all parts of the world to see the Alhambra, 
and stopped as a rule but two or three days. They rose 
early in the morning and worked with energy through 
the live-long day seeing things. Some of them even 
followed this employment into the night. 

And then they were gone. And others came. And 
others. There was a ceaseless round of strange people 
coming and going the whole time. 

Feverish Americans used to arrive and express pity 
because Spain was not like America. The fact that the 
Spaniards would not toil seemed to wear heavily upon 
their souls. Poor Spain ! How sorry they felt for her ! 
As they spoke of her — ^in the short gaps of time they 
allowed themselves between the rushes to see this thing or 
that thing — pity softened as far as possible their voices. 

I fear that I was often driven into saying plain things to 
the Americans. I used to suggest to them that their pity 
might weU begin at home. I had not seen much of the 
Spaniards, but I had seen enough to know that they had less than nothing to learn from the rushful, pushful people  of the States. The Spaniards knew how to live. 

I must confess that I liked the Scotchmen who turned 
up. They were a grand lot of fellows. We used to have 
great arguments in the cool of the evening in the garden. 
I was always sorry when they left. There was one old 
chap who had been all through the interior of China. He 
was a quiet old man, but a great hand at an argument. 
He was fond of buying old manuscripts. On one occasion 
I went with him to an antiquity shop and witnessed an 
encounter between him and the dealer. The dealer was 
an expert in the art of bargaining. But the old Scotch- 
man was more than an expert. He possessed genius. 
The first thing he did was to examine the manuscript 
through a miscroscope. After examining it he shook his 
head with sorrow and turned to go. The dealer called 
him back. Again he examined it. Then he raised his 
head and looked at the dealer reproachfully. The Scotch- 
man was evidently casting doubt upon what was alleged to 
be the age of the manuscript. The expression of his eye 
seemed to suggest that the dealer was a person who was 
not above adding a year or two to the age of his wares. 
I sat in a chair and looked on. It was what might be 
called a mind-contest. The Scotchman knew no Spanish 
and the dealer knew no English. This was the method 
used : — The Scotchman would put down so much money 
on the counter and point to the manuscript. The dealer 
would bend down and examine the amount, and then he 
would almost fall back in a faint at the smallness of it. 
After he had recovered^ he himself would get a much 
larger amount and in turn point to the manuscript. The Scotchman would then add a little more money to the  amount he had already put down. It was a bit like poker. 
The only difference was that the two men worked in 
silence. But in the end the old Scotchman won. He 
executed a masterly move. He picked up the manuscript 
again, and this time he examined the edges of it. Then 
he flung it down and picked up his money. This move 
settled the business. The dealer let him have it for half 
the price asked. 

There was Maurice de Waleffe, a young, handsome, 
easy-going Frenchman. He belonged to Paris and was 
on the staff of the Figaro. He was a tourist of the 
unique order. He hardly employed himself at ail in 
seeing things. 

I became very friendly with de Waleffe. We used to 
sit for hours together under the big elms and smoke 
dgarettes. I must bear witness to the fact that his 
cigarettes were the finest I ever smoked. 

He could speak no English and I could speak no 
French, and that may have been one of the reasons why 
we became such firm friends. When first we met wc 
made efforts at conversation. But the labour of it was 
more than either of us could bear. We were both men of 
calm, easy temperaments. I would have liked de Walefie 
to have come on tramp with me. He stayed in Granada 
something over two weeks. 

After the departure of de Waleffe I became very 
friendly with an Italian Count. He was in the habit of 
coming to Granada every year, and he was styled *^The 
Prince," because of his courtly manners. He was the 
politest man I ever met in my life. He could speak  some English, and when I told him that I was going to  tramp up through the country he asked permission to 
come with me. Could politeness go further ? 

Now and then tourists arrived who put on airs. And 
to tell the truth they were not English. My opinion is 
that the English tourist is rather mal^ned. He neither 
puts on airs nor is he rude. He is only awkward. 

The Count and a Polish engineer and I used to go 
down together to a place near the Plaza de Bibarrambla 
and imbibe cool, refreshing lager beer. It was kept on 
draught by a German and was a very good thing to take 
of a hot day. After imbibing, the three of us would 
amble easily down to the Puerto Real — keeping carefully 
on the shady side of the Calle de los Reyes Catolicos. 
Then we would amble easily back to get another refresher. 
It was good lager — glorious, cool lager. 

Occasionally female tourists used to appear in the weird 
get-ups that one sees in the French comic papers. I had 
often seen these caricatures and had always felt that there 
could not possibly be any ground for their existence. But 
I am bound to say that ladies now and then appeared in 
Granada whose make-up injured the eye, so to speak. 
Why they appeared thus I am unable to tell. But they 
appeared. It was as if they had walked out of a comic 
paper. 

Taken by and large the tourists were honest, hard- 
working people. The way they rushed and bustled round 
won one's respect. Often I wondered how they managed 
to escape sunstroke. But I suppose that nature in its 
wisdom had given them thick tops to their heads. 
A word as to the courier. 

The courier who accompanies the verdant British 
tourist through Spain is usually a most interesting person. 
He knows much more than is good for the person whom 
— to put it with mildness — ^he is leading by the hand. I 
have had many opportunities of studying him as he has 
passed in and out of Granada with his quarry. He hails 
from Gibraltar, where he has hooked his guileless tourist 
fish. He is a person of presence and understanding and 
has villainy written all over him. The Spaniards call him 
" Escorpion de la Roca " (a rock scorpion). 

It is, of course, needless to say that he is violently and 
aggressively and most patriotically English. He not only 
raises his hat, but he kneels, so to speak, when he hears 
the National Anthem. And I can't say that I wonder at 
it. The English are really his friends. They trust him 
with their pocket-books, which is saying a lot. 

As to the genesis of the breed of the courier — ^well, my 
eyes are not sharp enough to fairly detect it. But I should 
say it was complex. It seems to me to be a blend of 
Jewish and Spanish, with a colouring dash of Moor. His 
English is strange-sounding and misleading. How his 
Spanish is I don't know. 

His knowledge is all-embracing, and his honesty and 
probity are as sound and as solid as the Rock from whence 
he hails. And he is a great linguist. The tongues and the 
dialects of the earth are to him as simple, open books. 

These facts he will tell you of in his fluent, misleading  English. You will probably have only a faint idea of the  other things he discourses upon. You will most likely be 
puzzled. But you will have no doubt at all as to his  honesty and omniscience. He will manage to impress it  vividly upon you. He is a person who realises the value 
of iteration. 

One of these couriers did me out of two duros 
(ten pesetas). I can't go into all the details of the 
transaction, but sufficient is it to say that I was done — 
done brown. I thought that I was sharp and that I knew 
the ropes, but, alas ! when I thought thus I had no idea 
that the time would come to pass when I should have to 
measure wits with a rock scorpion — a courier from 
Gibraltar. And not only did this courier do me out of 
two duros, but he also palmed ojfF a bad duro on me as a 
climax. But I wish him well. He was one of the plea- 
santest and most interesting scoundrels I have ever had the 
good fortune to meet. 

On the night that he did me out of the two duros we 
drank together and vowed eternal friendship for each 
other. He told me how proud and glad he was to meet 
me — a man who had been,. as I had been, all over the 
world ! I must digress slightly here, and say that as a 
kind of balance against the oft-recurring recital of his 
deeds of honesty and omniscience I had been forced to tell 
him of some stirring deeds of my own in various parts of 
the planet. It doesn't do to allow a narrator of strong 
talent to have things too much his own way. 

His English was a trifle less unique than the English 
of couriers in general, and we were, therefore, able to 
understand each other fairly well. He told me that if I only knew French and Spanish I would have made a first class courier myself. This may not have been a compli- 
ment of the most ethical order, but, coming as it did from 
such an acute and observant quarter, I must say that I 
value it as endorsement of my keenness and sharpness gene- 
rally. I am sure that he meant it at the time. 

That night was one of the pleasantest and most jovial 
nights of my life. 

It was not till the day but one after he had departed — 
with his tourist quarry — that I found out how he had done 
me. But I don't regret it. He was an interesting man. 

But let us come with more directness to the point I am 
trying to bring out. The only good reason that an 
Englishman should take a courier through Sp^n with 
him is because the courier has to live. A man who is 
not intelligent enough to ask how much he is going to 
be charged at a hotel ought to do one of two things 
— either he ought not to travel at all, or he ought to travel 
with his parents. Such a person is unfit to face this rude, 
bleak world alone. His going around without a proper 
guardian only makes it harder for more intelligent people 
who have less cash. He raises the price of things. 

A courier is simply a man who tells lies in bad English. 
To the student of human nature he is, of course, invaluable 
— a mine. He is worth whatever price he may think fit 
— or be able — ^to exact. But he is no use whatsoever to 
the verdant, trustful British tourist whom he is leading 
blindfold, so to speak, through Spain. Besides robbing 
him at every hand's turn his information concerning 
things has at best but an individual value. I mean indi- 
vidual in the sense that it is original with the courier — his very own. He is a man with a strong, confident imagination. 

And there is another point. His quarry — or, rather, 
his tourist— can't call his soul his own. A person who 
takes a courier to lead him by the hand is naturally a 
person not over-endowed with strength of head or character. 
And the result is that he must do what the courier says. 
He must go here or there or see this or that according to 
orders. He has sold his soul through laziness. 

I remember one day talking to a tourist outside the 
hotel, and just as we were in the middle of the conversa- 
tion his courier came up and positively ordered him to 
come away. Something had to be seen ! The tourist 
was in no violent hurry to see this thing — ^whatever it 
was — ^but he went off like a lamb. 

It may be, of course, that there are couriers who at 
once know all places, know all languages, and at the 
same time are truthful and conscientious. But I should 
think that they were the rarest of rare birds. I should 
think that they don't often adorn this incomplete world 
with their presence. 

But even if they existed it would be much better for 
a man to blunder along of himself. The only way to get 
to know anything about a people or a country is to try 
your level best to understand them or it yourself. 

I go at some length into this question, not from any 
particular sympathy with the verdant tourist The law of 
life has it that a pigeon must be plucked. But it is as 
well to clear the air. It is as well to explain to travellers 
generally what sort of a man the courier usually is — ^at 
least in Spain — and what are his aims. 

As a matter of fact, there doesn't seem to be any exact 
or reliable information about anything in Spain. It is the 
great charm of the country. And the courier but adds to this charnu 

But he is a costly luxury. 


The Spanish policeman is a mild, inoiSensive person 
who carries a revolver and a long sword. He is psud at 
the rate of one and twopence a day — English money — 
and how he manages at once to uphold the majesty of the 
law and to keep his family is a problem. But I suppose 
he solves it somehow. Things are cheaper in Spain than 
they appear to the foreigner. 

His uniform is a shabby cross between an English 
postman's uniform and that of a Spanish officer. And he 
has to provide it out of his one and twopence a day. 

He goes alowly about doing nothing — doing it in a 
modest, unobtrusive way. This I have never seen in a police- 
man before. And here I must say that different policemen 
have different ways of doing nothing. An English police- 
man does it with dignity. An American policeman does it 
with truculence. A French policeman does it autocratically. 
But a Spanish policeman does it with modesty. 

I like him. He can't tell me much about anything, 
but still I like him. There is a livc-and-let-live air about 
him — an air that I have never before seen hovering about 
a Government official. 

He is a quick shifter of aguardiente. 

The Spanish beggar is a difFerent person altogether 
from the Spanish policeman. He has boldness and craft 
and insistence — ^and, indeed, every quality that goes for 
the making of success in the world. Why such a gifted 
person should be a beggar I don't know. It is impossible 
to know everything. 

He gets in front of you, he comes from behind, he 
comes from the side — an untiring, vigilant person, demand- 
ing alms. In the beginning he calls you '' SejBior " in a 
caressing voice. Should you pass him by, however, the 
" Sefior *' becomes packed to the full with scorn — some-^ 
thing like the " Thank you ! " of the London cabman 
when you have given him his just and proper fare. 
Should you give him alms he often enough asks for more. 

Perhaps he is at his worst when he is young. When 
he is old you have some slight chance of getting away 
from him by walking fast. But when he is young, 
and the weather is hot, you must either give him some- 
thing or suiler. He will follow you for a mile or more if 
necessary, deluging you at every step with interesting 
allusions to his poverty and to your own grandeur of appear- 
ance and natural goodness of heart and benevolence. You 
may not know a word of Spanish, but you will know that 
he is telling you that you are the finest thing that ever 
happened, and that he is very, very hungry. You can 
fed that he is telling you this. He has the art of making 
himself understood. He does not look hungry, but he has a 
hungry voice. In fact, the beggars of Spain look remark- 
ably well-conditioned. They are, of course, not dressea 
welK Often they are in rags. But then they are artists. 

One hot day I was coming up the steep road that 
leads to the Alhambra. It was the sort of a hot day that 
is really hot. No surface heat such as one gets in London, 
but a heat that got right into your blood. I was wishing 
that I was somewhere else than in the South of Spain. 

Suddenly, as I was toiling wearily along, two beggars 
of the youthful variety came out of the shade of some 
trees and tackled me. I groaned. By this time I had 
been tackled by so many b^gars that I fear I had become 
hardened to the expression of their woes. I had become 
uncharitable. 

^^ Cinco centimos, sefior I " they demanded, as they got 
one on either side of me. 

I turned and swore at them. 

But it was of no use. They smiled and told me how 
good-looking I was. "Bonito sefior — buena seftor. 
Cinco cfentimos, seftor ; cinco centimos ! " 

" Anda ! " (go) I shouted. 

" Mucha hambre — mucha hambre, sefior." (Very 
hungry— very hungry, sir.) 

I knew well what they were saying, for I had heard it 
so often. I knew it by heart. And I would have given 
them ten cintimos each to go, but I knew from experience 
that this would not have been effective — at least not in 
this case. They would have still followed me on general 
principles. 

They kept by me as I toiled in the heat up the steep 
road. Their voices and themselves surrounded and 
oppressed me. I had no idea what to do. Giving them 
money would not have absolved me from their company. 
I was in for it Finally, I suppose it must have dawned upon them 
that I would give them nothing, for their remarks began 
to take a scornful and abusive turn. ^^ Malo hombre ! " 
(bad man). " Malo ! " they began to shout. 

And then they dropped suddenly behind. 

I began to breathe with more ease and freedom. I 
had beaten them after all 1 But just as I was congratu- 
lating myself a stone whizzed past my ear. I turned, 
and there they were, something over fifty yards away. 
One of them was in the act of aiming a stone at me, 
whilst the other was gathering some up from the road. 

I dodged and ran towards them. But they slipped in 
amidst the trees on the side of the road. I might as well have 
tried to chase the wind. So I turned and made up to the 
Alhambra as fast as I could. An idea had occurred to me. 

All the while the stones kept flying past me, but I 
took no notice. And in time it ceased altogether. It 
would not do for them to follow me too far up. 

At last — ^at last I was talking with my friend, old Jos6 
Lara, a Spanish policeman. With many gestures, and a 
word or two of vigorous, bad Spanish, I made plain to 
him what had happened. 

He was most indignant. And as I had taken the pre- 
caution of giving him a peseta in advance his indignation 
soon mounted up to working pitch. I suggested pursuit 
and he agreed, and we started to run down the road 
together. 

Ah I They were there I — just slipping out of the 
trees nearly a hundred yards in front of us. I shouted 
out, and Josi Lara valorously tried to draw his sword. 
It was this confounded drawing of the sword that undid  us, for it enabled^the beggars to improve the start they 
already had. Poor old Jos6 tripped and fell as he was 
trying to get it out of the scabbed, and I had to stop 
and pick him up. 

He was up noWi^running alongside me and waving his 
sword. He was hardly the most efFective ally I could 
have had, but he represented the law. He clothed my 
pursuit of the b^gars with dignity and legality. I 
represented force, he represented law, but the b^gars 
represented swiftness ! 

And the beggars won. 

When they were altogether out of sight we stopped to 
take breath. And then Lara bethought him of his whistle. 
He got it 'from his pocket and blew, and in a moment 
there appeared three more policemen, to whom Lara 
recounted the story of the happening. They were 
becomingly indignant And then Lara sheathed his sword. 
The incident was closed. I gave him another peseta and, 
taking his arm, I came back with him up the road. 



After aU, everything has its uses, everything performs 
some duty. Philosophy has it so, and I am driven to the 
conclusion that philosophy is right. The beggars of 
Granada perform the duty of keeping the town awake. 

It is the easiest and most slumberous town I was ever 
in. A grand place of rest. Nothing ever goes on, no 
one ever does anything. And, like the policemen, the 
people of Granada do nothing in an honest, modest, un- 
obtrusive manner. At a glance you can tell that they are 
doing nothing and that they never intend to do anything. 
Granada is a town that sleeps under the shadow of great 
mountains. Visitors come from the outside world. But 
they are manifestly out of place. They are foreign, 
bustling, disturbing, human atoms. 

But for the beggars Granada would sleep and sleep till 
it died. They embody insistence, persistence, and tireless, 
indomitable energy. 

To me the most impressive thing in the cathedral ot 
Granada is the tomb wherein lie Ferdinand and Isabella, 
the Reyes Catolicos (Catholic Kings). The cathedral 
itself is in no way to be compared with the cathedral in 
Seville — that is, from the standpoint of sublimity of eflFect. 
I can't imagine a more wonderful place than the Seville 
Cathedral. It is as if it were the work of a power more 
than human. 

The cathedral of Granada is only a big, ornate, curiously 
built church. I was in no way impressed or thrilled by it. 
True, it has some magnificent altar-pieces done by an 
Italian artist. But a church cannot be judged as a church 
by any individual art work that it possesses, however 
great. It must be judged by the measure it gives of the 
effect it was intended to give — that of sublimity and awe. 
And the cathedral of Granada has no more the effect of a 
place of worship than has St. Paul's Cathedral in London. 
In the cathedral of Seville the impulse to kneel might well 
come upon one. But in the cathedral of Granada one 
simply feels curious — just as one might feel in some 
museum filled with unique treasures and objects of history 
and art. One walks about. One looks here and there. 
There is no vague, surrounding effect of mystery and 
solemnity. 

One is not in a place of God. 

But the tomb wherein lie Ferdinand and Isabella holds 
the imagination. The simple, dark coffins that have lain 
through centuries in darkness hold the dust of the figures 
that stood forth in the full blaze of the greatness of 
Spain. 

Isabella, who sent forth the great sailor, Columbus, to 
find dominion and treasure for Spain, lies here — dust. A 
woman was the dominant figure when Spain awoke to the 
full stroke of her power and drove forth the over-civilised  Moor. 

Civilisation is a wonderfiil thing, but it is well for a 
nation not to fall too much beneath its spell. Brutality is 
a sign of health in the life of a nation. Let us be frank 
and straight. To live a nation must be hard and brutal. 
Barbarism is but being consistent with man's terrible 
beginnings. Man has evolved out of obscure, horrible 
struggling. He is still a fighter, a brute of effective, 
wonderful organisation. And he loses his strength when 
he clothes himself with the subtle hypocrisy of over- 
civilisation. He becomes prey. 

And so it was that the Moors became the prey of the 
Spaniards — a fine, barbarous people. The Moors were 
far more intelligent than the Spaniards, but as a race they 
had lost their hardness. They had given themselves over 
to the expression of the senses. To see this one needs but 
to look at the Alhambra : — that wonderful expression of 
decadent Mohammedanism. 

And it came to pass that Boabdil, the Moorish King, gave oyer the keys of the Alhambra to Ferdinand and  Isabella, whose dust now lies in this tomb. All are gone — ^Boabdil, Ferdinand, Isabella. Gone are the hosts of Spain and the hosts of the Moors. 

A priest showed to me the vestments that Cardinal 
Mendoza had worn when he celebrated Mass in the 
Alhambra after the conquest of Granada. Strange vest- 
ments, golden-wove, that covered the shoulders of a 
fighting priest as he offered up solemn thanks for victory. 
The priests of Allah, of the Crescent, had gone, and in 
their place had come the priests of God, of the Cross I 
And now all were gone — were dust :— Catholic Kings, 
Boabdil, Christian and Moorish hosts, priests of Crescent 
and Cross. 



The Alhambra is the expression of a race near to death 
— of a race that had lost its greatness — its men. There is 
no vigour in it. It has grace and beauty and subtlety and 
charm — but no power. One can well understand that 
the race that built the cathedral in Seville would have the 
power to crush the race that built the Alhambra. Archi- 
tecture is the key to the character of a nation. It is the 
ultimate expression of the men of the time. 

The Alhambra is the remains of a great harem — a 
palace of pleasure built on a hill. A magical and 
marvellous embodiment of sensuousness and the enslave- 
ment of man to his senses. A place of fountains, and 
gardens, and courts, and slender, effeminate, marble 
pillars. A monument of voluptuousness, subtle, and 
strange, and deadly. And a place of cruelty. Stories are told of terrible happenings. In one of the courts a family was extirpated. 

Well might Boabdil stand at San Sebastian and give up 
the keys of Granada to Ferdinand and Isabella. The 
hour had come for him to pass out from his possessions. 
He had failed to keep with the sword what was won by 
the sword. He had been ousted by the divine right of 
force. And he passed on over the mountains to the 
sea and for ever out of Spain. He left behind turn the 
Alhambra, the sign of the doom of his race — a wonderful, 
curious, strangely-wrought, beautiful sign. Boabdil went 
forth into darkness. 

Cuesta de los Muertos (the Hill of the Dead). When 
the moon shines brightly along down the slope of this hill, 
it illumines three massive square towers. They were 
built in the beginning by the Moors when the Moors 
were men — ^when they were in their strength. They are 
the places wherein lived the Mohammedan soldiers of the 
Guard. From them was kept the watch through the day, 
and through the night, and through the years. From 
them rang the challenging voices of Arab sentinels. 
Three massive square towers. From them at sunrise rang 
out the clear voices of the East in prayer. Three towers. 
They tell of the time when the Moors were austere and 
strong — ^when they would have hurled the Spaniard back 
from Granada. These towers tell of the time when the 
Moors fasted and prayed and were heroes. They 
guarded the palace — the Alhambra that in the end 
became the sign of enervation and death — that sheltered 
a Boabdil. 

These noble and beautiful towers that stand by the Hill of the Dead. For hours I have watched them as 
they stood forth clearly in the light of the moon. I have 
stood in their shadows and listened for the clank of the 
steps of the sentries — sentries that were gone seven hundred 
years. And it seemed to me as if I heard the ghost-sounds 
of the steps of soldiers as they were moving on guard. It 
seemed as if the towers were filled with the ghosts of 
fighting-men — as if sounds came of the steps and th« 
moving of soldiers, and of the clank of arms — ^sounds 
living in the strange, deep silence and darkness of the 
past. 

I care nothing for the curious and wonderful palace of 
the Alhambra, with its pillars and courts and gardens. 
But I have reverence for these three Moorish towers. 

In them lived men. 

The gipsies have lived here in caves in the side of the 
mountain through hundreds of years. Before that they 
lived in an unsettled way in the mountains that sur- 
round Granada. Where they came from in the first 
place no one knows. They were here in the time of the 
Moors. They were here in the time of the Romans. 
Their ancestors saw the gleam from the swords of Roman 
soldiers as they marched along in the distance of the valley 
beneath them. 

The Albiacin. This is the name of the quarter. It 
joins Granada, but it is as distinct from Granada as the 
gipsies are from the Spaniards themselves. The few 
Spaniards that are here look strange and foreign and out 
of place. 

It has one rough, tortuous street that follows by the 
mountain face. On one side of this street are the caves 
where the gipsies live— on the other side the great valley 
stretches out and down. The sierras tower up behind 
the Albiacin, and again they tower up in the distance 
across the stretch of the valley. It is a strange place. 

There are crosses here and there in the rough, tortuous 
street, but they belong no more to the Albiacin than do 
the Spaniards. They are out of harmony. The religion 
of the gipsy goes back far beyond the religion of the 
Christian or even the religion of the Jew. 

The gipsies are an old people. Their impulse of 
worship belongs to a time that is dead tens of thousands 
of years — a time primal and old as the sierras themselves. 
It may be that the gipsies are unconscious of the fact that 
this impulse is an impulse of worship. It may be that 
they have forgotten the far-distant traditions of their race. 
But this impulse of worship lives in their blood. It finds 
expression in a strange dance. 

The gipsies beg, but they beg with an air. They 
have grace and self-poise and the subtle, mysterious 
charm that is called manner — ^that only exists in people 
that for a long time have come in an unbroken line from 
the same people — that fine, subtle charm that surrounds 
the personality as an atmosphere — manner. The gipsies 
possess it. It shows in their carriage, in their eyes, in 
their gestures, in their dress. The little half-naked 
children have it as they come up in the bright sun to ask 
for coppers. 

The women tell fortunes. They look into the mystery 
of the lines of the hand. Can it be that these strange 
people still retain a glimmering of some tremendous 
knowledge they possessed in the far past concerning the 
stars and their influence ? The strange, shining star worlds. 
Were their secrets once known to the gipsies ? 

They may have lost their history, they may have for- 
gotten their traditions, they may have no conscious sense 
of their old Phallic worship. But they are here — a remnant 
of some ancient, wonderful race. 



I was in the cave and Lola was dancing a dance of 
strange rhythm. The light from a lamp above fell upon 
her face, which was aflame with a strange expression. The 
rest of the cave was in darkness. I could hardly make 
out the forms of those who sat round watching the dance. 

The light was full upon the gipsy as she moved in the 
dance. Her great, dark eyes shone as fire shines in dark- 
ness. Her body swayed and undulated to music that had 
lived since the beginning of her race. 

She was a priestess now, and performing a sacred rite 
— a rite coming from a time when was worshipped the 
tremendous mystery of life itself. She was a reincarna- 
tion of some Lola that had lived thousands upon thousands 
of years before. She knew not that she was a priestess, 
but the spell of the old, long gone time had come to life 
in her blood. 

There were times when she danced softly, and there 
were times when her dancing was wild and expressed the 
vigour and the magic and the joy of life. And times 
when there was devilry in it — ^strange, sinister devilry, 
expressing hate and destruction. 


Around the scene was darkness. It was as if darkness 
enclosed a flame and the flame enclosed Lola. As if she 
were the priestess Lola that had been summoned by the 
might of some terrible spell from a time long dead and 
forgotten-^-«ummoned in a halo of flame to perform in 
this care a Phallic rite. 

Her arms waved strangely. Her body moved to the 
weird music. And I began to think of this dance as it 
was danced in the past — ^under the full light of the sun. 
What manner of people were they that witnessed it in the 
time gone by tens of thousands of years ? Were the 
secrets of life and of the worlds laid open before them ? 
Were they a race past us as angels would be past men ? 
Where had they gone ? What had become of them ? 
Was all that was left of their memory but a single rite or 
their religion ? — ^this dance that expressed the beauty and 
mystery of the body. 

It had now become wonderful, maddening, here in the 
dark cave. It fired the blood — and still it had in it an 
influence of fear. It caught and lifted one, and still left 
one trembling as though confronted in the darkness with 
something unknown. 

It seemed to me as if Lola had been dancing through 
a long, long time. For me the moment contained years. 

It is not years that make up life. It is the vital, 
supreme moment that comes through the lapse of time as 
the oasis comes in the desert. One may Uve through years 
in a moment. And through such a moment I passed as I 
watched Lola dance. I had no thought or heed for those 
who were watching with me. They were but strangers 
whom I had met in passing, and who had come here with me to the cave. They would be gone. I would let them 
pass from my mind. 

A great rafter stretched across the roof of the cave. 
From it pended the lamp that bore the flame that fell upon 
Lola. The body of the lamp was of brass, and formed 
into the shape of a serpent lying in a circle. It swayed 
gently as Lola danced beneath it. 

And now the music grew softer and Lola began to 
move slowly backwards as she danced. And the music 
grew softer and softer still, and Lola sank to the ground. 
Faintness had come upon her. 

And so was ended this strange dance — this rite of the 
religion of an old people — a people older than the oldest 
of the world's histories — a people older even than the 
oldest of the world's traditions. They lived here in caves 
in the mountains, a strange remnant of some mysterious 
people who had once, long, long ago, been of power and 
of might in the world — a people who had outlived some 
civilisation, magical, wonderful, and profound. 

Chapter VIII— HOW I WAS SENT TO GAOL 

How the row started I haven't the faintest idea. We were 
all together in a wine-shop in the Calle de los Reyes Cato- 
licos— a street in Granada. It was after twelve o'clock at 
night, and Rafael was imparting some interesting informa- 
tion to me at the top of his voice. What the information 
was about I don't know. But I was listening with the 
gravest attention and nodding acquiescence whenever I 
felt the right instant had arrived. One learns to be 
polite in Sp^n. 

All seemed to be going well, when suddenly I noticed 
Rafael's eye wandering. He stopped talking and turned 
quickly round to a Spaniard, who was not of our party. 
They glared at each other, and then Rafael made a plunge 
forward and caught the man by the throat. 

And that is all I know about the row. It may have 
been an old feud, or it may have been that the man 
attacked had made some impolite remark bearing upon 
the information that Rafael was imparting with so much 
vigour to myself, or it may have been anything. What- 
ever it was remains as much a mystery to me as what 
Rafael was talking about. All that I know is that the 
next instant I found myself at one end of the mne-shop 
with Rafael, Castro, Joaquin, and somebody else. In 
front of us was the man who had been attacked, and 
his friends. 

I hate bar-room rows. Being in one is more dangerous 
than being in a firing-line. Men are apt to be killed before 
they know where they are. Men advancing on a position 
have some chance for their skins, but this hand-to-hand 
business is always ugly. 

I got between the two parties and tried to explain. 
But as I knew, practically, no Spanish, my explaining 
powers were handicapped. 

** Malo, Ingles I *' shouted a man to me — the man who 
had been attacked by Rafael. I may as well say that when 
the first hostile move had been made I had turned quickly 
round and slipped my revolver from my breast-pocket 
down to my right-hand jacket-pocket. Thus, whilst I 
was talking peace I had my finger full on the trigger of my 
revolver, and was pointing it through the cloth of my coat 
in the direction of the man who had shouted " Malo ! " 
It is always well for the peacemaker to be fully armed and 
prepared. If he is not, he is more than apt to get hurt. 
Peacemakers are unpopular. 

During all this the din on both sides was deafening. I 
thought Rafael would burst. He shouted and gesticulated 
so furiously. I had to get on one side so as to dodge the 
sweep of his arm. Indeed, it was a bit hard to keep one's 
head through it all* I had no idea that Spaniards could 
work so hard. They shook their fists in each other's 
faces and waved their arms and hands, and roared out 
maledictions, and made all sorts of excited, compound 
gestures. 

It was then that I got with my back to the wall^ and 
began to study the scene. And one of the quick conclu- 
sions I came to was that the Spaniards were a people 
possessed to the full of concealed energy. 

The only calm person in the wine-shop was the stout, 
old sefiora who kept it. She sat behind the counter, 
close to a big, black wine-skin. Her face wore an ex- 
pres^on of peace and rest. I suppose she had seen rows 
before. 

And now the gallant Rafael rushed to the door of the 
wine-shop — ^flung it wide open — ^waved his arms over his 
head — and ran out. His back was to us as he wared his 
arms above his head, and the figure he cut gave to the 
scene a needed touch of comedy. 

Everybody ran out after him. And I ran out, too. 
And then I gathered Rafael's meaning. He meant that 
they should go out into the street and fight it out. To tell 
the truth I was rather glad of this, for I was curious to see 
how the Spaniards conducted a fight. As yet no blows had 
been struck, and I was beginning to think that they did 
not mean business. 

In the street there was a sort of a pause and then some- 
body whipped out a knife and flung it — I think, at Rafael. 
But it nearly hit me. It fell clattering on the stones 
behind me, after whizzing past my shoulder. 

This was too interesting, and I jerked the revolver 
from my jacket-pocket and fired just in front of a 
man who was coming towards me. Being knifed in an 
afifair that wasn't my affair didn't at all take my 
fancy. 

The revolver made a report like a cannon, and had the 
effect I knew it would have. Everybody scattered, leaving 
me the street all to myself. A revolver in the darkness is 
a quantity very much unknown. 

I had aimed the shot down just in front of the man's 
feet. I had no intention of hitting him. What I wanted 
was peace. When the knife was flung I had at once seen 
that if the row were not stopped someone would be killed 
— perhaps myself. And I had stopped it in the only way 
I could stop it — by putting the fear of God into them all. 
Had I threatened with the revolver it would have been 
fatal. The only way was to make them feel that business 
was meant — to let the actual music come suddenly on their 
ears. 

Peace now reigned in the Calle de los Reyes Cato- 
licos. 

All were gone:— Rafael, Castro, Joaquin^ the ally 
whose name I didn't know, and their opponents. Both 
friend and foe had come to the conclusion that my room 
was better than my company. 

I put my revolver back into my pocket and turned to 
walk away. At almost the first step my foot struck against 
the knife that had been flung. I picked it up and looked 
at it. It was an ugly-looking affair, and would have done 
for any man it struck fairly. 

Hardly had I gone fifty yards when I saw the flashing 
of lanterns in front of me, and in another moment I was 
surrounded by half a dozen serenos — night policemen. 
One of them put the point of his lance right against my 
breast, another held his revolver to my head, whilst the 
others held their swords ready to cut me down. 

I was arrested. 

There was not the least use of my showing fight in this 
case. For one thing the odds were too many, and for 
another I had no ambition to clash with the might of the 
Spanish law — ^when it was really aroused. I had five shots 
in my revolver, and my finger was on the trigger. But this 
time I could run no bluflT. I would have had either to kill 
or wound someone — and a hundred to one be killed in the 
end myself. 

I laughed out loudly and stretched out my hands — 
empty — towards the serenos, and the one — ^who held the 
point of the lance against me — flowered it and came up close 
to me. He searched me quickly and found the revolver. 
And then the sereno who was holding his revolver in a line 
with my head dropped his hand and put it away into his 
belt. He then took my arm, and I was escorted up a 
street which lay oflF to the left from the Reyes Catolicos. 
They talked excitedly during the whole time, but I said 
not a word. 

We had not gone very far before Joaquin and Castro 
appeared on the scene. They had not deserted me after 
all. The serenos stopped as they began to talk volubly 
concerning me. In Spain everybody is polite— everybody 
listens to everybody else. 

What my friends said I, of course, don't know, 
farther than that it was something to the effect that I 
was a person of a most respectable and peaceful calibre. 
This I could tell by the way the serenos shook their 
heads. 

The parley ended by our all going together to the 
police-station. 

At the police-station the serenos all began to talk 
together — but in the end the sereno who had found the 
revolver upon me was deputised to relate what had 
occurred. 

He told the story in a most graphic and tragic manner. 
One would have thought that I was just after killing a 
dozen men. He would point to me every now and then 
in a most impressive and dramatic way. 

He- began by describing the hearing of the shot. He 
imitated the sound, thus giving me a clue to his narrative. 
And he went on telling the whole affair — half in 
pantomime, half in words. When he got to the part 
where he was describing his searching for me I could have 
laughed, but for the fact that it seemed to me to be a time 
for gravity. Just as he finished his yarn he took my 
revolver out of his pocket and laid it on the table with 
impressiveness. The sergeant picked it up and tried to 
unlock the cylinder, but he did not quite understand the 
mechanism of it and he handed it to the sereno, who also 
tried to unlock it. He, too, failed. And then I made a 
sign that it should be handed to me. Without any 
hesitation the sereno handed it over, and I pressed down 
on the thumb-piece, unlocked the cylinder, and ejected 
the cartridges out on to the table. This seemed to relieve 
the tension of the situation. The sergeant picked up the 
five cartridges and the empty shell and looked at them 
with care. And then everybody looked at them in turn. 
They were even politely offered to me for my inspection. 
In the end they were put into an envelope and laid beside 
the revolver. 

I must confess that I was treated with the utmost 
politeness. I might have been some high, foreign official 
who had dropped in to see them. The police-sergeant 

gave me a cigarette, and listened with deference to Joaquin 
and Castro as they again set forth glowingly my virtues 
and general peacefulness of character. In fact, everybody 
was polite, from the sergeant to the serenos. And in a 
grave sort of a way they seemed pleased to have met me. 
I suppose they were grateful to me for giving them some- 
thing to do. 

Indeed, so polite was the sergeant that at one stage of 
the game I thought I was going to be let off. It was 
when I produced my license for the use of arms. He 
bowed most profoundly as I handed it to him. 

But in the end I began to grasp the fact that I would 
have to go to gaol. Joaquin and Castro protested, but it 
was of no use. The sergeant apologised in a most profuse 
manner. He was respectful and sympathetic. But, never- 
theless, to gaol I had to go. With many ^^buenas 
noches*' (good-nights) and bowings and handshakings I 
was escorted out of the police-station by the serenos. 
Castro and Joaquin accompanied us. 

The gaol was in the Calle Molinos, about a quarter of 
a mile away. Here again I encountered extreme polite- 
ness. The night director deferentially took my name and 
age and height, and the colour of my hair and eyes, and 
what I was charged with, and everything else he could 
gather in connection with myself, my past, and my present. 
He sat at a rickety table — a pale-faced, delicate-looking 
young Spaniard — and entered these interesting and exciting 
details into a book of moderate size. His method of 
gleaning the information was first to ask me a question. 
I would not understand, and then Castro or Joaquin would 
turn to me and ask me what I suppose was the same 

question. I would say something in reply which they did 
not understand — ^as neither of them knew English. A 
this they would quickly turn and translate to the delicate- 
looking young Spaniard what they themselves had not 
understood. When my measure had been taken fully 
and satisfactorily^ the young Spaniard signed a paper and 
handed it to one of the serenos. It was a receipt for 
my safe delivery into gaol. 

And then everybody who was able to do so left. I 
felt lonesome as I saw the big door closing upon the 
serenos — and upon my friends Joaqiun and Castro. For a 
moment I felt as a man might feel who was being left alone 
on a sinking ship. But I quickly recovered my spirits. 
My friends had assured me that they would be round to 
see me early next morning. 

I was not put in a cell, but I was allowed to sit in the 
big room with the night director and his brother and the 
gaoler and two guards. The room was a primitive-look- 
ing, tumble-down sort of a place, with a low ceiling and 
strongly barred windows. It had a rather dirty but com- 
fortable air, and it struck me that I might have got into a 
worse place. 

And then I b^an to make myself agreeable. I found 
out that the director's name was Juan Puente, and that his 
brother was named Luis, and that the gaoler's name was 
Miguel. How I managed this it would be difficult to 
explain. It was partly by means of gestures and partly by 
odd words of Spanish. All were friendly disposed towards 
me, and that, of course, helped. 

Puente ! It was the name of a famous baritone, and it 
suggested to me the idea of letting them know that once 

I had sang in opera as a baritone. I managed to convey 
this with some ease. This was a lucky stroke of mine, 
for it turned out that Luis Puente, the director's brother, 
was an amateur baritone, and that he had sung in opera in 
Granada. He wrote the names of the parts he had sung 
on a piece of paper. 

It was thus that relations were set up of a most 
sympathetic order. 

After that I managed to explain how I had been all 
over the world, and what a great man I was generally. 
They seemed much impressed. And then I managed to 
tell them how I had once heard Gayarre, the Spanish tenor, 
sing in South America. This Spanish tenor was the 
greatest and the grandest singer that had ever existed ! I 
pictured to my listeners the unutterable and boundless 
enthusiasm and emotion that had possessed me when I 
heard him sing. And then I slid skilfully to another 
theme. Spain was the finest and most wonderful country 
in the world, and as for the sport of bull-fighting — ^well, 
it was magnifico I grande ! And so I went on. We 
were all like brothers. The only rift in the lute, as far 
as I was concerned, was the fact that I happened to be in 
gaol. 

By this time daylight was coming in through the 
barred windows, and I suggested that we ought to have 
refreshments. The suggestion was received with favour, 
and one of the guards kindly volunteered to go out and see 
what he could do. He came back with a waiter from a 
restaurant that had just opened up. We gave our orders, 
and soon we were regaling ourselves with hot cofifee and 
biscuits and aguardiente. 

After this, Luis Puente suggested that I should lie 
down. And I went and laid myself down on his brother's 
— the director's — ^bed and was soon asleep. 

When I woke up I began to reflect upon the situation 
and to wonder what they were going to do with me. 
The glamour had passed off — the glamour that had been 
thrown upon the situation by my efforts of a few hours 
before in the direction of fraternity. 

The all-round politeness was, of course, consoling, but 
not knowing the language made me feel uneasy. I could 
not tell exactly what the charge was against me. And I 
was afraid that something might have happened during 
the night, and that I would be blamed for it. One could 
never tell. I had, of course, witnesses to prove that I had 
really done nothing, but still I felt uneasy. I would have 
given the world to have been able to understand Spanish. 

The idea came to me to appeal to the English Consul. 
He surely would be able to get me out of the bother. 
But when I turned the idea over in my mind, I rejected it. 
I had a strong feeling that it would be better to take my 
chance with the Spanish law. I felt that bringing in the 
Consul would only inflame and complicate matters. He 
would probably have to communicate with Madrid, and a 
big thing might be made out of nothing. I had broken 
the law of the country by firing off a revolver at dead of 
night, and there was the end of it. And I determined to 
take my chance with the Spaniards. It was the manlier 
course, and besides it struck me that it was hardly fair to 
overwork the British Empire. 

My reverie was cut short by hearing someone speak 
my name in a loud voice. Bartolome ! Someone was 
telling someone else a yarn in Spanish in the big outer 
room, and my name kept recurring in it. I knew it must 
be about my exploit of the night before. I listened hard, 
but I could make no connected sense out of it, though I 
could hear every word with the utmost distinctness. It was 
about me, and still I did not know what it was. I passed 
through a most uncomfortable and anxious moment. 
This voice might be saying all sorts of things against me, 
and here was I unable to reply by even a word. As I 
listened there came upon me a curious feeling of helpless- 
ness. 

For awhile I lay quietly. And then I got up suddenly 
and walked into the outer room. It was better for me to 
face it, whatever it was. 

The sun was now shining strongly through the iron 
barring of the window, and for the moment I was blinded. 
The voice stopped as I entered the room. 

And then I made out who it was that had been talking. 
It was one of the serenos who had arrested me the night 
before. He was standing in the middle of the room in 
front of a man in a blue uniform — a man whom I had 
not seen before. 

I looked at this man, and he looked at me. He was 
evidently a person of importance in the prison. I could 
tell this by the sereno's manner as he stood in front of 
him. I liked his face. It was at once intelligent and 
kindly. He signed to me to sit down. 

I sat down and looked around. Luis Puente and 
his brother were gone, and there were two guards in place 
of the guards I had last seen. The only one that was left 
of my friends of the night before was the gaoler, Miguel. 
He was sitting half asleep in a chair, with a cigarette in 
his mouth. 

I looked hard at the sereno, and waited for him to 
continue his narrative. But he did not speak again. He 
went and sat down near the door. 

And then the man with the uniform came over and 
tried to talk with me, but it was a failure. All that I 
could understand was that he meant to be really kindly. 

I endeavoured to ask him if I would get my revolver 
back, but I failed to make him understand. At last I 
made a rough drawing of it on a sheet of paper, and after a 
great deal of work he got my meaning. He then let me 
know that I would get it back — because I had a license. 
I found that as a rule I could understand him more easily 
than he could me. 

Our attempts at exchanging ideas were interrupted by 
a loud knock on the big door. Miguel went and opened 
it, and let in a man of the Guardia Civil (Civil Guard). 
With the guard were two men — one of them handcuffed. 
He remained standing near the big door whilst the guard 
and the other man came up to the table where the director 
del arresto — the man with the blue uniform — ^was now 
sitting. The guard spoke to the director for awhile and 
then the prisoner was asked some question, to which he 
answered ** Si " (Yes). The director then filled up a paper 
which the guard and the other man signed. 

At this point I struck in and asked what the man was 
arrested for. The director understood my question and 
made an answer. But I could not understand. 

The man who was handcuffed was a middle-sized, 
powerful-looking young man with black eyes and a square, 
strong face. He did not look like one who belonged to 
Granada. He had the look of the mountains about him. 
His skin was dark, and added to its natural darkness was 
the darkness that comes of exposure to wind and sun. 

I was sorry for the man who was handcuffed. He 
was a fine, resolute-looking, young fellow. He was some- 
thing between twenty-three and twenty-six years old. 
What his crime was I don't know. Probably something 
serious. He looked like a man who would do something 
serious if he felt that the occasion demanded it. 

I spoke to him and smiled. And he smiled back. 
We were in the same boat — fellow prisoners. And I put 
my hand into my pocket, got out a peseta, and held it 
towards him. "Aguardiente," I said. But his hands 
were held so tightly together by the handcuffs that he was 
unable to take it. Miguel, however, came to the rescue. 
He put the peseta into the young fellow's pocket. 

The formalities, whatever they were, were over now, 
and Miguel opened the big door again, and the guard and 
the man who was handcuffed and the other man passed 
out. 

It was about nine in the morning now, and it struck 
me that my Spanish friends should have arrived by this 
time. But the best thing for me to do was to wait 
patiently. In fact, it was the only thing possible to do. 
I was absolutely powerless in the matter. 

An hour passed, and I got anxious. During that time 
Enrique Tejada — the director del arresto — ^and I had been 
trying to talk. But ten o'clock, and no one turning up 
made me feel uneasy. Again I thought of the English 
Consul} but I had the same strong feeling that I had had 
at first against making any move in that direction. 

Suddenly it occurred to me to send a note to Santiago, 
the manager of the hotel where I was staying. I wrote 
one out and gave it to Tejada, telling him as well as I 
could that I wanted it to be sent at once to the hotel. 
Tejada s^d ** Si " most obligingly, but — well, he laid the 
note on the table. Again I spoke to him — and I pointed 
to one of the guards, meaning that I wanted him to act 
as messenger. Also, I took two pesetas out of my pocket 
and offered it to the guard. To this Tejada said, *• Cinco 
minutos*' (five minutes). But twenty minutes passed, 
and still the note remained on the table. Then I tried 
another plan. I asked if one of the guards couldn't take 
me to the hotel as his prisoner. There I would be able to 
see and talk with Santiago and Constant and arrange what 
could be done. After much labour on my part Tejada 
seemed to understand and to assent to my proposition. I 
was oveijoycd. It had now got very hot in the prison, 
and being there, together with the ansdety of not knowing 
what was going to happen, had got on my nerves. I Kad 
given up my Spanish friends. 

I stood up, and the guard stood up and buckled on 
his sword. It seemed too good to be true — ^that I 
was going to be let out into the open air. And it 
was too good to be true. For when I moved towards 
the big door and signed for myself and the guard to 
be let out, Tejada shrugged his shoulders and said 
I could, therefore, neither send a note anywhere nor do 
anything, and for the first time the whole business looked 
really serious. I would be taken into court — I would not 
understand a word — and all sorts of things might be 
said against me ! I was now at a loss altogether. Per- 
haps I had been accused of something serious. Every- 
body was extremely polite to me, but, for all that, I 
was shut up here in gaol and imable to get out even 
a message. 

And then it was that something happened. A quick, 
sharp knock came on the door. Miguel opened it and, to 
my joy, in stepped Jos6 Castro. 

Never, during the whole course of my life, was I so 
glad to see anyone. Here was indeed a friend. One 
who knew the language — one who knew what had 
happened — one who was on my side ! He knew no 
more English than did Tejada, but that mattered nothing. 
He was one of the friends who were going to get me 
out ! 

After greeting me with the utmost warmth he bowed 
to, and shook hands with, Tejada. And then he went over 
to the telephone. I had thought of trying to use the tele- 
phone before he came in, but I had given up the idea. 
The bigness of the task had appalled me. I could never 
have made the telephone people understand what I 
wanted. 

Castro was now talking to Santiago over the telephone, 
and telling him all about it. I, too, went to the telephone, 
but as Santiago's English was of the shaky, uncertain 
variety — ^and was not improved by coming over the wire — 
I made way again for Castro. 

Santiago would be down in viente minutos (twenty 
minutes). Castro assured me that all was well. I would 
be out of gaol in dos horas (two hours). 

Soon Santiago arrived with Constant, a French mining 
engineer, who spoke both English and Spanish fluently. 
They laughed and shook hands with me, and assured me 
that all was well. And then Constant and Santiago and 
Castro left me, saying that they would be back soon with 
an order for my release. ^ 

And sure enough they were back in something over an 
hour — back with the order which they exchanged with 
Tejada for myself. 

I was now free to go, and after shaking hands with 
Tejada and Miguel and the guards I stepped out with my 
friends through the big door to liberty. 

But that was not the end of the affair. 
The next day I was sitting writing in my room when a 
knock came on the door. A man entered and laid a 
paper before me on the table. There was no use of my 
asking him what the paper meant, though I knew well 
that it bore some relation to the injury I had inflicted on 
the Spanish law the night but one before. 

1 made the man sit down and gave him a cigarette. 
Then I called for my friend Constant. Constant came and 
explained that the paper meant nothing — absolutely 
nothing. It was only a request from the abogado to call 
on him next day at one o'clock. The abogado was a 
counsellor who acted as judge. 
^' It is a mere nothing/' said Constant, reassuringly. 
" You but call to see the judge." 

By this time I was beginning to get it into my head 
that these mere nothings often meant a good deal in Spain. 
The Spaniards were great in the art of covering with velvet 
the grip of steel. 

** Must I go to court ? " I asked. '* Does the judge sit 
in court. 

** Yes, he do sit in the court. But it is a mere nothing. 
I go with you. Santiago go with you. All is well. It is 
nothing." 

*^ But is it necessary for me to go ? " I asked again. 
" Can't some other way be managed ? Going there to- 
morrow will make me lose a day's work." 

** Ah, that is bad. But you but go to the court." 

'*Look here, Constant. If I don't go, will I be 
arrested." 

" Perhaps. I do not know well." 

«* Oh, let's have it straight ! Will I be arrested if I 
don't go ? " 

Constant shrugged his shoulders and looked at 
me. 

" Yes," he answered, after a pause. 

And then he went out along with the man who had 
served the summons. 

As I was going to court the next day with Constant 
and Santiago and Castro the nature of the defence to be 
set up on my behalf was e3cplained to me. It seemed that 
nothing at all was to be said about the row. The story to 
be told to the judge was that I was explaining the mechan- 
ism of the revolver to Joaquin, and that in the handling 
of it the trigger was accidentally pressed, causing it to 
go ofF. 

" I will interpret for you/' said 0)nstant. 

It was a simple and ingenious defence, and it had the 
quality that defences usually have — ^that of being calculated 
to set forth in a glowing light the innocence of the person 
accused. It was my innocence first and verity second. But 
I was completely in the hands of my interpreters. I was 
as wax. 

Constant explained to me that if it became known that 
there had been a row it would then be plain that the revolver 
was fired with intent. Intent was nothing, of course, 
G)nstant explained in his usual style. But — ^well, if it were 
proved, I might possibly have to go to prison. The law 
in Spain was very odd when the question of intent had to 
be considered I 

As a matter of fact, my only intent in firing ofiF the 
revolver at all was a peaceful one — ^to stop the row. I had 
stopped it, and most probably saved life, and for reward I 
had been clapped into gaol and afterwards had to go 
through all this bother. I had received the peacemaker's 
usual reward. 

We were in the court punctually by one o'clock. It 
was a small court adjoining the great court, and the 
abogado sat in a big chair. Above him was a picture of 
the young Spanish King, Alphonso XIIL The picture 
was in the centre of a great, square piece of stiffened red 
cloth, which ran nearly up to the ceiling and then was 
curved forward, so as to throw a shade over where the 
abogado — the judge — sat. 

We aU bowed to the abogado, who motioned us to sit 

down. And then I noticed that Joaquin — my companion 
of the adventure — ^was sitting next to the abogado. Joaquin 
came from his place of honour and shook me warmly by 
the hand — and the abogado smiled in my direction. 
This looked promising. It seemed that Joaquin was an 
advocate — a barrister — who did not quite get the number 
of briefs to which his talents entitled him. It was he, 
I found out afterwards, who was the engineer of my 
defence. 

The abogado was a man of about forty-five. He wore 
a fuU, dark beard. His forehead was intellectual, and in 
his face was a fine, high expression. 

To people living in England it is impossible to describe 
exactly the character and the air of this Spanish court of 
justice. It had not the severity nor the forbidding cold- 
ness of look of an English court — nor its absoluteness. It 
was much more human. One felt that under certain con- 
ditions a greater degree of justice and equity would be 
rendered in a place of justice such as this. In a place 
of justice such as this subtler things than a mere cog- 
nisance of facts would count. Sympathy would count. 
There would be a full considering and a full account taken 
of provocation. Here in this court the truth would 
be grasped that the provoker is at the very least equally 
guilty with the provoked — that truth of which the 
English law takes so little heed. In an English court an 
undue reverence for the thing that is called "a fact ** often 
causes rank injustice to be dealt out by a judge. 

I contrasted the bearing and manner of the abogado 
with the bearing of some of the men who deal out justice 
in the courts of London, and I am bound to say that the 
abogado by no means suffered in comparison. True, he 
smoked cigarettes whilst in court, but, on the other hand, 
he was not rude« He would not be the man to take 
advantage of his position to insult people who were in 
trouble. Neither would he make feeble, pointless jokes 
anent the misfortunes of others. 

No one was sworn. The proceedings began by the 
questioning of the serenos — two of whom were in atten- 
dance. In the meantime my revolver and cartridges had 
been brought in and laid upon the table before the abogado. 
And the serenos went on to tell of my arrest and of the 
finding of the revolver upon me, I was then asked — 
through Constant — if I had fired with intent. 

** No," I answered. 

The serenos were then asked if I had fired with intent. 
The answer was that they did not know. They had not 
seen me fire the shot. 

Everybody in the court was smoking cigarettes — all 
but myself. I had some in my pocket in a case, but I 
hardly liked to take one out, for it struck me that perhaps 
it would not be considered etiquette for the criminal of the 
party to smoke. I thought that perhaps that was the 
reason why Constant or Santiago had not ofiFered me one. 
But the not offering of a cigarette to me may have been an 
oversight. 

Off in front of me sat a very stout Spaniard, who 
looked for all the world like a typical English bailiff of the 
County Court. He had the same big, heavy build, and the 
same florid colour of face, and the same dull, aggrieved 
expression. He, too, was smoking a cigarette* 

At last the abogado opened a big law book^ and after 
turning over the pages till he got to the place he wanted he 
beckoned to Constant. Constant went over and got the 
book — and then I was shown the passage relating to the 
firing off of firearms within the limits of a town. The 
fine for the same was between five and fifty pesetas. Con- 
stant translated it to me, and told me that the abogado 
had decided to fine me only ten pesetas. This I at once 
paid, and I was given a receipt for it from a grave old 
Spanish gentleman who wore spectacles, and whose cigarette 
was nearly smoked to the end. I offered him one from 
my own case, which he accepted with a " Gracias, sefior." 
I put the case back into my pocket without taking one out 
for myself. I was not yet quite sure of my ground. 

Just after this Santiago came up and acquainted me 
with the fact that 1 had to pay the costs of the court — 
eighteen pesetas. Again I shelled out and again I was 
given a receipt by the grave old Spanish gentleman with 
the spectacles. Things seemed to be going with much 
smoothness. I was supplying oil to the wheels of the 
law. 

But was I going to get back my revolver ? It was one 
of the best revolvers that could be got in London, and every- 
body in Granada had admired it — ^policemen and every- 
body — ^and I was afraid that some official might pay it 
the delicate compliment of confiscating it even though I 
did possess a license for the carrying of arms. 

I spoke to Constant of my fears in a low tone, and 
he walked over to the abogado and conferred with him. 
The result was satisfactory, for the abogado smiled and 
beckoned to me. I walked up to the table and he 
handed me the revolver along with the five cartridges 
and the empty shell. I thanked him and went back to 
my seat. 

The trial was over now, and everybody looked satis- 
fied. Even the stout Spaniard who looked like an 
English County Court bailiff — even he wore an air of 
contentment. I felt contented myself. The trial had 
lasted something over an hour. 

Suddenly I noticed the judge looking at me. And 
then he spoke to me from his chair of judgment. Con- 
stant translated what he said. He was asking me if I 
were pleased — if I were satisfied with the trial. 

I stood up and answered through Constant, that I was 
very much pleased — that I was very satisfied indeed — and 
that I was more than delighted to have had the honour of 
meeting the judge. The uniqueness of the question — 
of a judge asking one who had been a prisoner if he were 
satisfied with his trial — appealed to me. I wondered if an 
Englishman had ever been asked such a question before. 

And then Constant and Santiago and Joaquin and 
Castro and I rose and shook hands with everybody in 
court. I even grasped the hand of the stout bailifl^-look- 
ing Spaniard with fervour. And I managed to make the 
judge understand — as I shook his hand for the second and 
last time — that I hoped to see him again soon — in 
London ! 

Chapter IX.— PASSING ALONG 

The night before I left Granada Santiago gave a dinner 
in my honour. Josh Castro, Constant, iGifael, and several 
others were present. It was a clear, warm night, and we 
dined together at a big table in the garden. 

I sat next to Joaquin, the advocate who had engineered 
my defence at the trial. I was endeavouring to tell 
him what great friends and comrades-in-arms briefless 
barristers and journalists were in London. I tried to 
picture the affinity between the two. Joaquin looked 
intelligent and then he endeavoured to tell me something 
— ^what, I don't know. 

We had a gay and jovial and jolly time. Santiago 
came to the front like a hero of old. He made the 
strongest sort of a requisition upon the forces of the 
cellar of the hotel. The way he commanded Emilio to 
bring up the bottles caused me to gaze upon him with 
respectful admiration. 

All of us made speeches at the dinner. They were of 
a complimentary, flowing, and flowery nature — ^as speeches 
at d*nners ought to be. As near as I could get at it the 
burden of the speeches was that I was all right — ^was one 
of the best. They were much charmed because of the 
fact that I had graced Andalusia with my presence. 
Everybody was proud to have met me. Indeed, we were 


all proud and pleased and gratified to have met one 
another. 

The end of each speech was punctuated by the com- 
manding voice of the noble Santiago as he ordered Emilio 
to bring up yet another bottle. 

My speech was by common consent admitted to be 
the speech of the evening. I praised Andalusia and 
everything Andalusian to the skies ; I praised Granada 
and all its works of art and monuments ; I praised Santi- 
ago and the hotel — and more especially its wines; I 
praised every one at table ; and I praised Spain in general 
and all its wonderful sports and institutions. In fact, I 
gave forth a paean of praise at the top of a naturally 
strong voice. 

By this time I had, of course, become somewhat facile 
in the art of praising Spain. I had done it so often. 

I sat down in the midst of tremendous applause. 
Rafael, who had not understood a word of what I had 
sud, applauded even more loudly than any one else. I 
thought he was going to break the table. 

And then Constant arose and made a translation ot 
my speech. Again there was applause — if possible greater 
than ever. During it Rafael shook me fervently by the 
hand. **Mucho bueno Ingles!'' he exclaimed, with 
emotion. When the applause softened down I got up 
and made a few closing remarks. 

After that we turned in. 

At five o'clock in the morning I was up and getting 
ready to start. It had been arranged that Santiago, Con- 
stant, and Joaquin were to accompany me along the road 
for a few kil6metros. My next point was Jaen, a town 
ninety-seven kil6metros from Granada. It lay up due 
north. It would take me three days to make the 
journey. 

At six o'clock the four of us were in a carriage bowl- 
ing down the road leading out from the Alhambra. And 
soon we were out through the low, Moorish arch at the 
entrance of the gardens. I turned for a last look at this 
arch. Many a hot day I had toiled up the steep road 
towards it and passed through it into the grateful, cooi 
shade. Most likely I would never see the strange old 
arch again. 

We were going now at a swinging rate along the 
Calle de los Reyes Cat61icos. The shops were beginning 
to be opened, and people were moving about and along. 

And then we turned to the right by the big plaza at 
the end of the street — and to the right again. And we 
were on a road that went out in a straight line into the 
distance — out as far as the eye could see. The road to 
Madrid, 

Little was said as we went along. Partings have 
always in them a touch of sadness. You can never tell if 
you will meet people again. You may have shaken them 
by the hand for the last time. It is hard to meet people 
and to like people and to pass from them and never see 
them again. 

The carriage had stopped, and G)nstant was strapping 
up my knapsack on to my back. We were now some 
kil6metros away from Granada. The town was not to 
be seen. It was lying ofF behind the mountains. 



They were going back along the road now, and I was 
standing looking after them. They had shaken me 
again and again by the hand, and had wished me all sorts 
of luck on my journey. Joaquin had told me, through 
Constant, that some time or another he might come and 
see me in London. Poor old Joaquin I He had the 
goodness and kindness of heart of the Andalusian. 

I watched the carriage till it was out of sight. 

For a while I felt low-spirited, but in time it began to 
wear off. It was a beautiful morning, and the air was 
fresh and cool, and soon I felt myself again. I began to 
think of what I was going to see and what would happen. 
It was grand to walk briskly along this fine road, and 
after an hour or two*s tramp I was as right and as fit as a 
nail. 

As I was coming up to the first pueblo (village) I 
heard in the distance the barking of dogs, and soon I saw 
two of them running towards me. But I was fully pre- 
pared to receive them. Constant had warned me that the 
dogs in the country were savage and dangerous, and I had 
provided myself with a heavy litigo (whip). I had, of 
course, my revolver to hand, but shooting d<^s was no 
part of my plan. It would only get me into needless 
trouble. 

As the dogs were rushing towards me I slipped off* 
my knapsack and got off the litigo, which was strapped 
along the top of it. Then I stood a little to one side of 
the knapsack and waited, my litigo grasped in my left 
hand behind my back. Had the dogs seen it they might 
not have rushed on me with such valour. 

The foremost dog was a big, ferocious fellow. His 
hair bristled and stood around his neck, forming a sort of 
collar. 

As he came on I backed as though afraid, and he 
jumped at me as though he would take me down at a 
bite. But — ^well, he met the litigo right across the eyes. 
And as he howled and swerved he met it again and again. 
He stood still, and gave what I suppose was a howl of 
wonder, and I got him again right in the middle of the 
howl. It was a glorious moment. 

Just as I was swinging the latigo to let him have one 
for good measure, he turned and executed with great 
swiftness a strategic movement to the rear — to the 
village from whence he came. His tail hung limp as he 
hurried along. I suppose he was going to tell the other 
dogs that it was just as well to treat me with civility. 

I looked round for his companion in the charge. But 
I could see him nowhere. He was in all likelihood a dog 
of a discreet calibre. 

I picked up my knapsack and walked into the village. 
When I got there I saw the big dog with whom I had 
had the interview. I whistled to him. But he was coy. 
He withdrew himself. 

I went into a posada (inn) and made signs that I 
wanted something to eat. I thought it just as well not 
to trust to the few words of bad Spanish that I had at my 
command. A sign is a sign, a gesture is a gesture, but a 
mispronounced word is either nothing or — ^what is worse 
— ^misleading. 

The woman to whom I made the signs was rather 
good looking. She understood at once what I meant 
A man, who was probably her husband, was sitting at 
the farther end of the posada smoking a cigarette. He 
came forward and looked at me. 
*' Buenos dias" (good day), he said. 

I bowed and wished him good day, and then he went 
and sat down to resume his flow of thought. His 
curiosity had been satisfied. 

I turned towards the door of the posada, and in front 
of it there was standing a crowd of men, women, and 
children. The whole Ullage had evidently turned out 
to see what I was like. They stared at me in a 
frank, natural way. I waved my hand and smiled to 
them. 

^' Buenos dias,'' I said to them. 

"Buenos dias. Buenos dias," said several of them. 
And then some of them came right into the posada to 
get a closer look at me. My knapsack claimed especial 
attention. One little girl, with round blue eyes, examined 
the straps of it. 

The woman of the posada had gone to get something 
ready for me to eat, and I thought I would try and 
engage the posadero (the man of the inn) in conversation. 
He seemed not unwilling, and we began to try to talk to 
each other. But the labour was of too vast a nature. 
We had to give it up. The posadero relapsed back 
again into thought, and began to roll for himself a fresh 
cigarette. 

Just then one of the Guardias Civiles came into the 
inn. He looked at me closely, and then asked me 
several questions at once. I did not understand his 
questions, but I knew what their general drift must be. 
He wished to know who and what I was, what my inten- 
tions were, where I was going, and if I were a person of a 
generally sound and honourable character. 

He was a fine-looking young fellow, and was armed 
with a Mauser rifle, a bayonet, and a revolver. He wore 
a three-cornered hat with a piece of white linen hanging 
from the back of it for protection from the sun. 

I answered his questions by producing my passport. 
He held it upside down and scanned it with much care. 
The crowd round the door pressed nearer. 

The English passport is a large, impressive document. 
The man who designed it knew what he was about. It 
fills the bill. It is well and clearly printed on good, 
thick paper, and is a thing of much size and space. It 
crackles with much importance when it is being opened 
or flourished in the air. Even a Fiji Islander would 
know that such a document could only come from a 
Government of great weight and might and heft. 

The guard handed me back the passport and bowed. 
And then I showed him a Spanish paper, published in 
Seville, in which was printed a couple of paragraphs con- 
cerning me. This, combined with the passport, clinched 
the matter of my introduction to the village. Again the 
guard bowed. 

By this time the woman of the posada had got some- 
thing ready for me to eat. She beckoned to me, and I 
went into a big room that opened off from the back of the 
posada.. But just as I got in it struck me that I had for- 
gotten something. I ought to have invited the guard 
and the rest of the people to eat with me. It is the custom 
in Spain. So out I came again and I invited the guard 
and every one in sight to join me in my repast. They 
thanked mc, but did not respond to my invitation 
which is also the custom in Spain. It is just as well 
for travellers to remember this latter part of the 
custom. 

The ceiling of the big room into which I had been 
invited was low, and the floor of it was paved with small 
cobble-stones. In fact, the whole floor of the place 
seemed to be paved in this way. It was the first thing I 
had noticed. 

In the centre of the table upon which the meal was 
spread was a small skin of wine with a mouthpiece stand- 
ing out from the top of it I poured some of it into the 
thick glass that stood near my plate. It was Valdepefias — a 
yellow-coloured wine tasting like sherry. It was a good 
wine, but it had rather a hard, peculiar flavour, perhaps 
owing to being kept in a skin. 

The rest of the meal was composed of bread and fried 
eggs and ham — not the ham one gets in England, but 
the ham of Spain. The combination of Valdepefias and 
bread and eggs and ham was good. Indeed, I have often 
fared much worse. I have often in my time dined oflF a 
combination of nothing. 

After I had demolished the lot I asked how much the 
charge was. (Cuanto?) But the woman would take nothing. 
I appealed to the man whom I thought to be the posadero. 
But he seemed helpless in the matter. All he did was to 
shrug his shoulders and smile. I had happened amongst 
hospitable people. 

I then tried to find out the name of the village, but 
cither they did not understand my question or I could not 
follow the name when it was pronounced. And after 
thanking the woman and her husband I picked up my 
knapsack and went out. 

Over on the other side of the road was the group that 
had stood outside the posada when I first entered it. 
They were looking at me* and talking amongst them- 
selves. As I passed them I raised my hat. The children 
of the group followed me as I went on out of the village. 
I was honoured with a rearguard. 



About an hour after this I came up with a little old 
man who was going in the same direction as myself. He 
carried a folded-up blanket upon his back, and at once I 
knew him for a tramp. He had the characteristics that 
tramps have the world over — characteristics difficult to 
describe, but plain to the eye of experience. The sign of 
the road and of the open air and of the instinct to wander 
was written all over him. 

I was glad to see him. He was indeed one who might 
turn out to be a companion for me. 

I stopped him, and we b^an to try and talk to each 
other — and, curiously enough, we in a way understood 
each other. There must have been some affinity between 
us. But even if there were not, there was still the tie 
that binds tramps the world over. We were going the 
same way. 

His name was Aquilino. This I soon found out He 
was going to Madrid — Madrid that was oflF to the north 
more than four hundred kiiometros. I tried to find out 
why he was going to Madrid, and after a while I under- 
stood that he had a son there. 
He must have been at least sixty years old, and his 
eyes were brown and his skin was very brown and very 
wrinkled. His face had a gentle expression and his voice 
was qiuet. His hair and beard were white. He was a 
very little old man — a little worn-out old man whom the 
world did not want I felt very sorry for him, and I 
determined to keep him with me for a while. 

I asked how he managed with the dogs on the road, 
and he gave me to understand that the perros (dogs) did 
not bother him much. Perhaps they considered that he 
was not one to be afraid of. 

We walked slowly along together — he with his 
blanket and I with my knapsack. I showed him the 
Utigo that I had for the dogs. He smiled and said 
something that I did not understand. 

All around us on the road the mountains were show- 
ing in the distance. We were still within the range of 
the Sierra Nevada. We would be in it for some time. 
And then we would pass into another range, and then to 
Jaen. 

The country around looked lonesome. Not many 
people lived in it. Constant, who had surveyed it, had 
told me that it was much the same all the way up to 
Madrid. It was a country full of beautiful colour and 
possessed of a strange stillness of aspect. As we were 
going along Aquilino paused and pointed towards the 
mountains to the west. 

" Aguila," he said. 

I stopped and looked. OfF there, high above, a great 
bird was poised. An eagle. It was a long time since I 
had seen an eagle before. 

It seemed to stay motionless in the air. And then it 
began gradually to descend. And then it rose again — 
and went round slowly in a circle. And all the while its 
wings did not appear to move. It moved as though 
impelled by some power other than the power of flight. 

Suddenly it swooped, or rather fell — fell so quickly 
that the eye could not follow it. A tragedy was passing 
before us. And then from a tree beneath a bird began to 
fly away. It flew slowly — ^reluctantly: — as if it had left 
its mate behind. 

At about five o'clock in the afternoon we came in 
sight of a village. It stood off from the road about a 
mile to the right of us, and I proposed that we should go 
there and get something to eat. I was not hungry, but I 
thought that my companion might be. He looked as if 
a good meal would do him no harm. 

At first Aquilino did not want to come. I suppose 
he was afraid of the Guardia Civil. But I prevailed upon 
him, and we cut off from the road and on towards the 
village. 

We were in it now — a curious old Moorish-looking 
village of narrow, uneven streets and low, strong-walled 
houses. It was a much larger place than the village I 
had been in last, and it looked as if the people of it saw 
strangers now and then, for we did not attract the atten- 
tion I had expected. Even the Guardia Civil did not ask 
us questions. He only came up — looked at us — and 
passed on. 

We walked on through it till my eye caught what 
seemed to be the fonda (hotel). I stalked in as if I 
owned it — Aquilino following behind. 
*^ Buenos dias,*' I said to a man who came to meet 
me, and I signed to Aquilino to translate. Aquilino 
did not know English, but he knew what was wanted, 
and he fell in at once with my idea — that he was to act 
as though he were able to interpret for me. Life on the 
road sharpens a man's wits. 

Thanks to Aquilino things travelled here in the 
fonda with smoothness. The people of the place 
evidently took him for my bodyguard and factotum-in- 
chief. And soon we were seated at a table discussing the 
provisions — or, rather, Aquilino was discussing them. I 
was not hungry. 

I watched the old man as he ate without letting him 
see that I was watching him. It must have been a long 
time since he had had a proper meal at a table. It was 
easy to see that he had been on the road — roughing it — 
for a long time. He ate nearly everything from his 
hand. It is a habit into which a tramp naturally falls. 

I would have given worlds to have been able to talk 
with him. I would have liked to have found out his 
view point of men and of things and of the world. He 
must have had a philosophy of his own concerning life 
just as all men have — whether they are able to express it 
or not. He must once have had ambitions, even though 
they were now perhaps dead. This little old tramp with 
the brown, wrinkled face and the white hair I I watched 
him as he broke his bread and slowly ate it. I noticed 
the change that gradually came into his face as he drank 
his wine. What could he be thinking of? What 
memories were coming up before him? Did the wine 
bring back to him some feeling of the magic of his 
youth? He was a Spaniard and I was an Englishman. 
We were men of a different race. We could not exchange 
a thought. We could hardly even exchange a word. 
And still — ^and still there was a link between us. Had 
he suddenly told me his history — ^in words that were 
clear to me — I felt that it would have been a history the 
like of which I had known of before. 

Race is a big word, but Circumstance is a bigger 
word. 

We stayed at the fonda till the next morning, and then 
I paid the bill and we went off. To me the going along 
the road was like old times. The only real difference 
was that I was tramping along in a country where I didn't 
know the language. But the circumstances were in a 
way much about the same, and I had a companion with 
me who was going the same way. Little, wrinkled, 
brown-faced Aquilino. 

The road wound along through the beautiful sunlit 
mountains — a fine, good road along which it was a joy to 
walk. I know of nothing better than walking along a 
road in the clear, open sunlight. 

We did not meet many people, and the dogs gave us 
little trouble. Now and then we came upon a man of 
the Guardia Civil, but he let us pass without question. 

Campillo de Arenas. We came near to this village 
towards the evening, and the dogs came out to look at 
us. But I showed them the latigo. 

Here there was some trouble about Aquilino. The 
guard came up and asked him some question, and 
Aquilino fumbled all through his pockets and at last 
produced a battered-looking paper. The guard looked 
at it and then asked him more questions — and I was 
wondering what might happen. Aquilino looked per- 
turbed. I gathered then that the paper he had showed 
the guard was a paper describing himself, which the law 
required a Spaniard to carry. Evidently there was some- 
thing not quite up to the mark about it or it was 
out of date. The guard was adopting a stern, judicial 
sort of an attitude, perhaps in a measure for the 
benefit of the people of the village who had thronged 
round us. 

Then it was that I pulled out my impressive-looking 
passport — my English passport. It made a crackling, 
important sound as I flourished it before the guard. And 
I talked loudly in English to the effect that Aquilino 
was my servitor and bodyguard generally, and that I had 
brought him with me from Granada. Aquilino also 
lifted up his voice, and between the noble-looking 
English passport and him and myself the affair was 
settled. What affiiir I don't quite know. But, anyhow, 
the guard was vanquished. He stepped down from his 
lofty horse. 

I liked the people I met in Campillo de Arenas. They 
had the simplicity that country people have the world 
over, and added to it they had the charm and grace and 
lightness of bearing of the Andalusian. There was 
nothing of the clodhopper air about them, such as one may 
see about the people of a small village in England, and 
still no one could mistake them for anything but country 
people. Country people with grace. 

The accommodation we got in Campillo de Arenas 
was hardly the best going. I would as lief have camped 

out. But Aquilino and I didn't mind that very much. 
We were old campaigners. 

Jaen. At last we were coming towards it. It was 
the morning of the day but one after we had been in 
Campillo de Arenas. We saw it first through a gap in 
the mountains— about seven kilometros off from us. 
And then we lost sight of it again in a bend of the 
road. 

The colour of the soil of the country had now 
changed. It had turned from dark brown to red, and 
the vegetation was much stronger. There was more life 
in the soil — more vigour in the earth. We were still in 
a mountain country, but the sterility had gone. The 
country behind us, though beautiful to the eye, had still 
a sterile, unfruitful aspect. 

It was a very old town, this Jaen. The Romans had 
been here. The Moors had been here. Its name had an 
odd sound, just as (hine) would sound in English. It 
had been the scene of assaults and strife between opposing 
races. And still it remained here in the mountains. An 
old town. 

In the town itselt there was an air of bustle and 
activity, and the people looked altogether different from 
the people of Granada. They moved around with 
energy. One felt that they were afflicted with the 
ambition to indulge in toil. The town was only ninety- 
seven kilometros from Granada, but as far as the diiFer- 
ence in the people was concerned it might have been a 
thousand. In Granada every one seemed to be lost in an 
eternal siesta. But here, in Jaen, the people were very 
much awake. It may have been the diiFerence in the soil 
and the air that caused it, but, whatever the cause, the 
difference in the people was striking. 

I don't mean, of course, to suggest that Granada was 
in any way inferior to Jaen because the people of Granada 
took life with restful ease. Rather is it the other way 
about. I personally prefer people who know and appreciate 
the full value of leisure. These hurrying, bustling 
people and these hurrying, bustling towns and nations by 
no means have the meaning in the life of the world that 
is generally imagined. They are but mere puffing bubbles 
on the great river of Time. And for this blessing thanks 
be to Heaven. No, when I compare the people of Jaen 
to the people of Granada I am only telling of what came 
under my eye — as an observer. 



In some curious way Jaen suggested — to me — an 
English town. It was essentially a Spanish town — and 
still the suggestion of England was in it. As I walked 
through it I thought of Richmond, though it was out- 
wardly in no way like Richmond. Indeed, it rather 
looked like a small Seville — a Seville of uneven, steep, 
up and down streets. In the middle of it was an immense, 
irregularly shaped plaza. To the right a jagged mountain 
towered above it. In the distance — when I had seen the 
town first — this mountain seemed rather off from it. But 
now it stood right up against the town — close and steep 
and threatening. 

Here it was that I had a difference of opinion with 

Aquilino. He would not come with me to the hotel. 
I tried all the persuasion that my limited stock of Spanish 
words would allow of, but it was of no use. And then I 
tried to bring him with me by force. But he was firm, 
and in the end I handed him three pesetas, with the 
understanding that he was to shift for himself, and that 
he was to meet me the next morning in the plaza, so that 
we could continue our journey north together. He 
insisted, however, on giving me back two pesetas. " Uno " 
(one) was enough for him. 

At the fonda (hotel) I cut rather a poor figure, as far 
as making myself understood was concerned. The few 
words of bad Spanish that I had picked up turned out to 
be the merest reeds. No one seemed to have the 
remotest idea of what I was driving at whenever I tried 
to ask a question. 

The place was kept by a very nice old lady, who 
seemed to take some sort of an interest in me. First I would 
ask the waiter a question. He would look puzzled, and 
he would call the other waiter to the rescue. He also 
would look puzzled. Then the old sefiora — who sat in 
a great chair — would be referred to. To tell the truth 
she never looked puzzled at all, but always talked to me 
quickly and at length. She was kindly disposed, but 
unintelligible. 

The chief question I wanted to ask was when dinner 
would be ready. I was hungry. And the mystery of my 
question was at last dragged from its lair by the old 
sefiora^s daughter. I was told that dinner would be ready 
at "siete media** (half-past seven). After this I sub- 
sided. I indulged in no more questions. Life was too 
short. Evidently the people here spoke Spanish with a 
diiFerent accent from that spoken in Granada. 

The dinner was a most free and easy affair, and most 
enjoyable. The waiters served it in their shirt-sleeves 
and cracked jokes with the guests, who were all Spaniards. 
I was looked upon with curiosity, and one of the waiters 
came over to me and, after a while, made me understand 
that a " caballero " near the other end of the table wished 
to enter into conversation with me. The " caballero '* 
knew English! I smiled and looked towards the 
" caballero " and waited for him to open fire. He was 
rather a smart-looking young Spaniard. 

He smiled as I smiled, but he said nothing. And 
then it dawned upon me that he was waiting for me 
to talk. I presume he wanted to hear a sample of the 
English language. 

I made some remark about the weather, and all at 
once there was a sudden lull in the conversation which 
was going round. Every one became attentive. They 
wanted to hear how their compatriot acquitted himself as 
a linguist. 

The young Spaniard answered my remark, but I under- 
stood him no more than the dead. His English was of a 
make weird and curious — something like my own Spanish. 

I pretended, however, to have understood him per- 
fectly. In Spain politeness is as necessary as salt is to 
an egg. 

" Buena Inglfes *' (good English) I said. He under- 
stood what I meant and he looked pleased. Indeed, every- 
body at table looked pleased. Their compatriot had 
acquitted himself with honour. I had said the tactful thing. 
During dinner this young man enlivened me with his 
conversation. He seemed to burn with the desire to tell 
me a number of things. He would address a cryptic 
remark to me in alleged English, to which I would reply 
in English. After each reply I would wind up with the 
compliment in Spanish Q^ Buena Ingl^ *') upon his high 
linguistic attainment. 

As the dinner got towards its end I found myself 
becoming a favourite — ^rapidly attaining to popularity. 
Even the waiters began to beam brotherliness upon me. 
I do believe that I could have got credit at that fonda. 
Such is the power of politeness — in Spain. 

When my linguistic friend arose from the table he 
said " Good night 1 ** These were the only two words of 
h«s that I understood, and I was not sorry to hear them. 
His conversation was getting to be rather a strain. 



The next morning I went to the plaza, but I could see 
nothing of Aquilino. I waited round for a couple of 
hours and then I went back to the fonda. 

I was sorry that he had not turned up, but I suppose 
he had reasons of his own for not caring to accompany 
me. Poor old Aquilino ! It may have been that he had 
thought he could better avoid the attentions of the guards 
in the villages by going alone. But whatever the reason 
I was sorry not to see him. I had intended to have him 
with me as a companion and a sort of interpreter. But 
that was impossible now. And I altered my plans some- 
what. 

I stayed in Jaen till the next day. 

Chapter XIII. Women of spain

How beautiful are the women of Spain! There are no women in the world to compare with them. They contain within themselves the charm and wonder and magic and mystery of España. 
Golden women of a golden land. One hears men tell of their charms. These fine, supple, enchanting women. But to see them is to feel that no word of the traveller can fairly depict them.
 A beautiful woman is a joy to all. She is as a sunset, as a flower, as something wonderful and strange and alluring.
One sees the Spanish women as they walk along the 
streets of the towns of this glowing, shining land. One 
sees them in the country parts and the villages. But more 
especially does one see them in Seville in Andalusia. Here 
the beauty of the woman of Sp^n ripens to absolute 
perfection. Delicious gids with dark hair and dark eyes, 
and girls with fair hair and blue eyes. Gloriously shaped 
girls going gracefully along. Girls with lustrous eyes and 
the faces of flowers. 

The fine, supple, enchanting women of Spun. These 
women of magical and alluring beauty. These glowing, 
tender, passionate women full of life and fire. These 
daughters of the light of the sun. 

To the one who comes from the dark North, where the 
sun shines not, they are an alluring revealment. 

Enchanting woman of Spain ! One might well come 
from the farthest and darkest part of the world to listen 
to the soft, full music of the tones of your voice. To see 
you is a delight to the eye. You appeal strangely to the 
mind and to the senses. 

Golden woman of a golden land.

