
CHAPTER II A  SIBYL  OF  RONDA 

DAWN  in  a  garden  of  Andalusia.  .  .  .  To  the 
south,  across  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  the 
faint  purple  outlines  of  the  Atlas  Mountains  mark 
the  mysterious  coast  of  Africa.  To  the  north, 
beyond  the  green  vega,  four  ranges  of  clear  cut 
Sierras  Gazoulos  rise,  one  behind  the  other,  from 
gray,  vaporous  valleys  of  mist.  The  only  sounds 
are  the  rhythmic  breaking  of  waves  on  the  beach; 
the  short  breathing  of  a  herd  of  goats  —  black, 
tawny,  and  white,  with  coarse  hair  and  fierce, 
yellow  eyes,  and  the  crisp  crunch,  crunch  of  their 
teeth  cropping  the  roadside  grass.  The  night 
flowers  hang  their  heads  and  go  to  sleep,  the  day 
flowers  lift  their  faces  to  the  sun;  the  smell 
of  heliotrope  drenched  in  dew  is  an  unforgetable 
thing.  Breakfast  is  memorable,  too;  dates  from 
Morocco,  and  rich  Spanish  coffee  flavored  with 
cinnamon,  served  under  an  arbor  of  Marechal 
Neil  roses. 

So  began  our  first  day  in  Spain,  at  a  place  the 
Romans  called  Portus  Albus,  and  the  Moors 
— they  settled  here  soon  after  landing  on  Gibraltar, 
Jezirat-I-Kadra  -  "  the  green  island."  Can  you 
derive  the  modern  name  of  Algeciras  from  that? 
You  must.  Our  old  friend  Tarik  was  here, — 
witness  the  great  aqueduct  he  built,  that  still 
brings  Algeciras  his  royal  gift  of  water,  always 
the  legacy  of  Roman  or  of  Moor. 

To-day,  Gibraltar  is  England's  key  to  the 
Mediterranean;  yesterday,  Algeciras  was  the 
Moors'  key  to  Spain.  They  held  the  Peninsula 
seven  hundred  years,  think  of  it!  —  nearly  twice 
as  long  as  white  men  have  held  America;  then 
it  was  wrenched  from  them,  the  door  was  locked 
against  them.  Less  than  three  hundred  years 
ago  our  ancestors  landed  on  Plymouth  Rock, 
but  how  should  we,  in  New  England,  feel  if  the 
Indians,  the  Mexicans,  or  the  Canadians  rose  up 
and  drove  us  out  of  our  stately  cities,  our  green 
pastures,  our  fertile  wheat  fields?  The  Moors 
made  a  brave  stand  at  Algeciras  —  it  was  their 
last  ditch  —  and  put  up  a  good  fight  here.  In  the 
year  1344,  the  town  was  besieged  by  Alonzo  XI 
of  Castile,  with  the  help  of  crusaders  from  every 
part  of  Christendom.  The  siege  lasted  twenty 
months.  Chaucer,  writing  forty  years  later,  de- 
scribes a  true  knight  as  one  who  "  had  fought  at 
Algecir,"  as  we  might  say  of  one  of  Thermopylae's 
Three  Hundred  or  of  Balaclava's  Six  Hundred. 
In  1760,  four  hundred  years  afterwards,  the  Spanish 
King,  Charles  III,  rebuilt  and  fortified  the  place,  "to 
be  a  hornet's  nest  against  the  English."  For  one 
hundred  years  Gibraltar  and  Algeciras  —  now 
deadly  places,  both  of  them  bristling  with  guns, 
full  of  dynamite  —  have  glowered  at  each  other 
across  the  bay.  The  other  day  the  English  came 
again  to  Algeciras.  Armed  this  time  with  British 
capital,  they  have  built  one  of  the  hotels  of  the 
world  here,  and  called  it  the  Reina  Maria  Cristina, 
as  a  compliment  to  the  Spanish  Queen  Mother. 

*  We  did  not  expect  to  find  such  a  fine  hotel  in 
Spain,"  I  said  to  the  capable  English  manageress. 
"  Ah,  well!  we  hardly  count  this  as  Spain,  you 
know!  "  she  answered,  with  a  fine  insular  contempt 
for  all  things  "  foreign." 
"  She's  right !  "  cried  Patsy.  "  For  Dios.  Shall 
we  never  get  out  of  England  ?  "  and  willy-nilly 
he  carried  us  off  to  lunch  at  Don  Jaime's  fonda, 
in  the  old  part  of  the  town. 

The  Don  was  waiting  for  us  on  a  bench  outside 
the  inn  door,  smoking  his  inevitable  cigarette,  in 
the  soft  spring  air.  He  looked  a  little  bleary 
about  the  eyes,  as  if  he  had  not  had  enough  sleep. 

"  Don  Jaime  is  up  early  to-day  for  our  sake," 
Patsy  explained;  "  as  he  goes  to  bed  at  four  in  the 
morning,  he  does  not  usually  appear  before  two  in 
tne  afternoon." 

*  The   morning   is  a  disease,"   said   the   Don. 
"  I  find  it  best  not  to  go  out  until  the  day  is  well 
aired." 

"  Please  observe,"  Patsy  interrupted,  "  that 
this  place  has  a  proper  odor  of  garlic;  at  last  we 
are  out  of  the  smell  of  English  roast  beef!  " 

The  Don  sighed.  "  Nevertheless,  I  comfortably 
recall  the  roast  beef  we  had  at  school  in 
Stoneyhurst,"  he  said;  "it  was  rare,  with  plenty 
good,  red  gravy." 

*  That  was  all  right  in  England;  we're  in  An- 
dalusia now.     Let's  begin  with  an  olla,  then  a  dish 
of  rice,  saffron,  pimientos,  and  little  birds, —  and 
wine  from  that  fattest  wineskin.     I  counted  ten 
of  them  outside  in  the  road,  leaning  jovially  to- 
gether against  the  wall  of  the/onc£a." 

When  he  got  his  wine  from  the  "  fattest  wine- 
skin " — it  tasted  a  little  of  the  "  leather  botelle  " 
Patsy  raised  his  glass. 

'  We  will  drink,"  he  cried,  "  to  everything 
Spanish,  muchachas,  olios,  dons,  torrones,  and 
fondas,  and  confusion  to  all  interlopers.  Isn't 
this  jolly  little  place  better  than  the  Maria  Cristina? 
Isn't  the  company  more  friendly  and  far  more 
diverting?  See  the  notary  and  the  doctor  at  the 
table  near  the  door;  at  the  next,  the  priest  and  the 
professor  (they're  both  taking  snuff);  that  fat, 
military  man  with  the  green  gloves  is  a  colonel 
of  infantry.  Those  swell  English  officers  you 
admired  so  much  at  the  Reina  Cristina  simply  own 
the  hotel!  We're  admitted  to  the  smoking  and 
billiard  rooms  purely  on  sufferance.  I  like  your 
inn  best,  Don  Jaime." 

"Ah,  well,"  said  the  Don,  "I  like  bath 
every  morning,  and  all  that  luxushness  when  I 
stayed  at  the  Reina,  though  it  was  much  pain  to 
put  on  cocktail  coat  every  night  for  dinner." 

"  Treasure  every  gem  of  speech  he  lets  fall," 
murmured  Patsy,  "  they  grow  rarer  —  don't  you 
notice  ?  —  as  his  English  comes  back  to  him." 

"He's  always  been  like  that,"  said  J.,  "it's  be- 
cause he  learned  English  when  he  was  young." 
Some  days  he  speaks  as  well  as  you  or  I,  then 
again  he  talks  a  hodge  podge  no  man  can  under- 
stand." 

"  What's  the  matter  with  the  wine,  Don  ? " 
cried  Patsy.  You  don't  like  it." 

*  Wine  is  not  agreeable  to  my  belly,"  said  the 
Don.     "I  will  take  to  keep  you  company,  un  poco 
de  ginebra,  de  campana,  with  much  water." 

*  You  must  not  expect  ice,"  Patsy  explained. 

'  You  will  not  hanker  for  it,"  said  the  Don, 
taking  a  clay  water  bottle  from  the  shelf  behind 
him.  *  This  alcarraza  is  —  how  you  say  ?  holey  — 
no,  porous,  keeps  water  as  cold  as  you  might 
drink  him,  by  evaporation."  He  poured  out 
the  water  and  put  the  alcarraza  back.  It  had  a 
rounded  bottom  and  could  not  stand  upright. 
The  Romans  used  the  same  kind  of  vessel;  you 
see  them  at  Pompeii.  They  were  made  in  this 
shape  because  they  were  used  to  pour  libations 
of  lustral  water  to  Vesta,  and  would  have  been 
defiled  if  they  had  been  set  down  on  the  ground. 

By  this  time  the  fruit  was  put  on  the  table. 
All  the  other  guests  had  left  the  room  except  the 
priest  and  the  professor,  who  were  playing  a  game 
of  dominoes.  A  large  melon  was  placed  before  J. 
He  looked  at  me  as  he  cut  it : 

'  You  remember  what  I  have  always  said  ? 
Till  you  come  to  Spain  it  is  impossible  to  know 
what  a  melon  can  be." 

:<  No  earthly  melon  can  taste  as  good  as  this  one 
smells,"  said  Patsy.  *  It  is  as  if  all  the  spices  of 
Arabia  had  been  let  loose  in  this  room!  " 

The  servants  had  withdrawn,  the  clatter  of  the 
dishes  had  ceased.  Some  one  opened  a  window; 
from  the  garden  came  the  music  of  a  guitar  played 
by  a  master  hand,  a  man's  voice  singing  a  song  of 
Andalusia: 

"  Me  han  dicho  que  in  te  casas9 
y  asi  lo  dwe  la  gen,te, 
todo  sera  en  un  dia 
tu  casamiento  y  mi  muerte." 

(They  have  told  me  thou  art  to  wed,  so  people 
say;  all  shall  be  in  one  day,  thy  marriage  and  my 
death.) 

Don  Jaime's  thimbleful  of  gin  and  his  two  cups 
of  black  coffee  —  he  ate  scarcely  anything —  had 
waked  him  up  wonderfully.  He  smoked,  with  my 
permission,  between  the  courses  throughout  lunch, 
flicking  the  ash  from  his  cigarette  with  the  phe- 
nomenally long  nail  of  his  little  finger;  his  hands 
were  white,  handsome,  and  exquisitely  kept. 
Lunch  over  and  the  serenade  finished,  Don  Jaime 
settled  his  old  black  sombrero  jauntily  on  the  side 
of  his  head,  buttoned  up  his  threadbare  coat  — 
its  darning  was  a  work  of  art  —  and  declared  him- 
self ready  to  show  us  the  town. 

"  You  would  like  to  paint  it  red,  wouldn't  you  ?  " 
said  Patsy. 

"  White  better  is  suited  to  that  climate,"  said 
Don  Jaime.  His  slang  was  current  in  the  England 
of  the  sixties,  and  he  took  ours  literally,  but  he 
laughed  buoyantly  because  Patsy  laughed. 

Algeciras  is  a  clean,  pretty  town,  with  neat, 
whitewashed  houses,  handsome  iron  gratings  to 
doors  and  casements,  and  curious  metal  gargoyles 
and  gutters  painted  green.  Here  and  there  from 
a  window,  or,  in  the  more  important  houses,  from 
a  balcony  like  a  small  grated  out  of  doors  boudoir, 
leaned  a  handsome  Algeciras  girl,  her  dark,  smooth 
hair  beautifully  dressed,  with  a  bright  flower 
worn  over  the  middle  of  the  forehead, —  a  pink 
rose,  a  white  camelia,  or  one  of  the  gorgeous  red 
or  yellow  carnations  one  must  come  to  Andalusia 
to  see.  We  walked  in  the  alameda,  a  well  laid 
out  promenade,  with  neat  little  gardens,  each  with 
a  small  pavilion  on  either  side.  We  loitered  in 
the  city  square,  admired  its  beauties,  and  the 
handsome  uniforms  of  the  smart,  well  set  up 
Spanish  officers,  drinking  coffee  and  smoking 
cigarettes  outside  the  more  fashionable  cafes. 

"  Mire  (look) !  this  is  the  bull-fighters'  cafe*," 
said  Don  Jaime,  as  we  turned  into  a  side  street, 
"  and  there  is  Bombito,  the  first  matador  in  Spain. 
He  has  come  down  from  Madrid  for  the  bull-fight 
to-morrow." 

An  open  door  gave  a  glimpse  of  a  tawdry  in- 
terior with  large  mirrors,  red  plush  seats,  and 
atrocious  decorations.  At  a  table  near  the  win- 
dow sat  the  matador,  a  magnificently  built  man, 
with  a  frank,  open  face  and  a  courageous  eye. 
He  was  dressed  in  Andalusian  costume, —  a  short, 
close-fitting  coat  like  an  Eton  jacket,  red  sash, 
very  tight  trousers,  wide-brimmed  hat  of  hard 
gray  felt.  His  hair,  tied  in  a  cue,  was  turned  up 
under  his  hat;  his  full  ruffled  shirt  was  fastened  by 
large  diamonds;  a  superb  cabuchon  ruby  burned 
on  his  finger.  Around  him  sat  a  group  of 
aficionados,  the  fancy,  the  young  bloods  of 
Algeciras.  As  we  passed,  Bouibito,  looking  up, 
recognized  Don  Jaime.  The  matador  smiled 
and  nodded,  and  the  aficionados  turned  to  see  the 
fortunatf  man  to  whom  Bombito  waved  his  hand. 

"  Spain  at  last,  Spain  of  the  songs  I  have  sung, 
the  pictures  on  fans  and  guava  boxes  I  have  col- 
lected," Patsy  burbled  joyously. 

"  Quando  los  matador es  matan  en  la  corrida,  van 
a  la  plaza  bonitas  con  fiores  y  abanicos"  (When 
the  matadors  are  killing  in  the  bull  ring,  come 
the  pretty  girls  with  flowers  and  fans.) 

Not  far  from  the  plaza,  as  we  were  passing  a  house 
of  quality,  with  seraphic  green  gargoyles,  Don 
Jaime  halted  and  looked  sharply  across  the  way. 
A  correct  young  man,  in  a  rakish  gray  sombrero, 
stood  at  the  opposite  corner  waiting,  not  loitering 
like  us;  it  was  evident  that  he  was  here  with  a 
purpose. 

"  Behold  the  novio!  "  said  the  Don;  "  I  feared 
he  dead  or  married." 

Patsy  asked  who  the  gentleman  with  the  var- 
nished boots  might  be,  who  was  gazing  at  an 
upper  window  with  a  white  blind;  he,  appar- 
ently, did  not  see  us.  The  Don  explained  that  he 
was  a  novio  (fiance)  hadendo  el  oso  (doing  the 
bear).  He  had  heard  it  said  that  every  afternoon, 
for  five  years,  this  faithful  lover  had  stood 
outside  the  window  of  his  beloved  for  exactly 
three  hours! 

"Is  he  mad?" 

"  Is  love  lunatics  ?  Then  must  be  vasty,  crazy 
palaces  by  all  Spain.  He  follow  one^.  antique 
custom,  what  we  call  'cosas  de  Espana.' ' 

Sunset  found  us  far  from  the  town  on  a  lonely 
path  skirting  the  coast.  We  looked  through  the 
ragged,  blue  cactus  hedge  at  the  beautiful  view; 
watched  the  flame  kindle  and  flash  out  from  the 
lighthouse  on  Isla  Verde;  the  ferry  boat,  Elvira, 
pass  on  her  last  trip  from  Gibraltar  to  Algeciras. 
A  few  steps  further  on  the  path  brought  us  out 
upon  a  bold  headland  where,  out  of  sight  of  the 
town,  an  old  house  sloughed  and  sagged  on  its 
foundations.  A  large  fig  tree  grew  on  one  side  of 
the  porch,  a  cork  tree  on  the  other;  a  tame  lamb 
lifted  its  head  from  nibbling  the  grass  and  bleated 
a  long  "  ba-a-a." 

"  Picturesque,  isn't  it  ?  "  said  Patsy.  His  gaze, 
idly  roving  over  the  landscape,  concentrated  and 
grew  intent  as  the  door  opened,  and  a  girl  in  a  red 
dress,  with  a  yellow  handkerchief  over  her  head, 
came  out  of  the  old  house.  It  was  as  if  a  rough 
oyster  shell  had  opened  and  shown  the  perfect 
pearl  it  held. 

"  I  say,  don't  you  think  it  wicked  to  be  so  hand- 
some ?  "  groaned  Patsy. 

With  a  light,  graceful  step  the  girl  walked  to  the 
edge  of  the  cliff.  A  straggling  path  led  down  to  the 
beach  where  an  old,  patched  boat  lay  on  its  side. 
On  a  shelf  of  clean  sand,  below  a  tiny,  ill-kept 
kitchen  garden,  lay  an  elderly  man  dressed  in  good 
black  clothes  —  it  was  Sunday.  The  girl,  evi- 
dently his  daughter,  called  him  to  come  in,  the  sun 
had  gone  dow%  he  would  catch  cold.  The  old 
fellow  obstinately  refused  to  move;  he  was  very 
comfortable  where  he  was.  Then,  seeing  us,  he 
scrambled  to  his  feet : 

"Ola,  ola!  Engerlish,  Engerlish! "  he  hailed 
us  gleefully,  waving  an  arm  over  his  disreputable 
head.  Two  grave  men  of  his  own  class,  who 
passed  at  that  moment,  reproved  him  sternly, 
but  he  was  in  the  incorrigibly  merry  stage  and 
continued  to  wave  and  shout : 

"  Engerlish,  Engerlish !  How  much  ?  Very  dear, 
goddam." 

*  This  is  my  third  visit  to  Spain,"  said  J.,  "  and 
that  is  the  first  drunken  man  I  have  seen  even  here." 

"  C/aro,"  said  Don  Jaime,  "  we  are  not  afflict 
with  that  vice  of  drunkenness." 

A  rusty  brown  water  spaniel,  lying  near  the  old 
drunkard,  rose,  yawned,  stretched  itself  fore  and 
aft,  and  sniffed  at  Patsy's  boots. 

"  Notice  where  the  hair  is  worn  off  his  back  ?  " 
Patsy  murmured,  taking  a  burr  out  of  the  dog's 
long,  flapping  ear.  "  A  strap  has  done  that  —  a 
strap,  I  suspect,  that  fastens  together  two  little 
water-tight  kegs  filled  with  tobacco  from  Gibraltar. 
Smuggler !  Is  the  old  fellow  your  partner  ?  Where's 
the  entrance  to  the  smuggler's  cave?  Don,  we've 
discovered  a  contrabandist's  den !  " 

"  May  be!  "  laughed  Don  Jaime. 

The  spaniel  lost  interest  in  us  tpid  sat  down  to 
search  for  fleas.  The  girl  had  persuaded  her 
father  to  come  indoors.  She  supported  him  as  he 
staggered  towards  the  house. 

"  I'm  off;  it  must  mortify  her  to  have  us  see  him." 
Patsy  strode  ahead;  we  followed.  Soon  the  fierce, 
prickly  blades  of  the  blue  cactus  hid  the  house 
from  view. 

"  A  pretty  gel,  not  ?  "  was  the  Don's  comment. 

"  I  wonder  what  her  name  is  ?  "  said  Patsy. 
"  Dolores,  Pepita  ?  It  was  worth  the  price  of  the 
journey  just  to  see  her  face!  "  He  was  silent 
during  the  rest  of  the  walk,  keeping  well  ahead  of 
us  and  singing  snatches  of  an  old  song : 

"  vous  connaissez  que  fai  por  mie 
une  Andalouse  a  Voeil  lutin " 

We  left  Algeciras  before  daylight  for  Ronda. 
If  the  Spaniard  sleeps  late  at  home,  on  his  travels 
he  must  be  an  early  bird, —  the  trains  all  seem  to 
start  between  midnight  and  cockcrow.  Don 
Jaime  remained  behind.  Some  night,  he  ex- 
plained, when  he  felt  particularly  fit,  he  would 
omit  going  to  bed;  otherwise  he  must  pass  all  his 
life  in  Algeciras;  to  get  up  in  time  for  that  hob- 
goblin train  was  not  possible. 

Across  the  bay  we  could  make  out  the  faint 
silhouette  of  Gibraltar  against  the  ashen  sky,  a 
black  lion  asleep  under  the  pallid  day-star.  The 
swift-coming  dawn  little  by  little  transformed  it  to 
a  gray  lion  dormant  on  an  amethyst  sea.  Long 
after  the  great  caved  mountain  was  lost  to  sight, 
a  distant  growl  shook  the  air. 

"  Morning  gunfire  at  the  Rock,"  said  Patsy, 
"that's  the  last  we  shall  hear  of  the  British  Lion  for 
some  time." 

Sunrise  came  while  we  were  in  the  heart  of  a 
dark  forest.  The  hoary  old  trees  had  mighty, 
wide-spreading  boughs,  covered  thick  with  small, 
gray-green  leaves  like  the  ilex;  the  trunks  were  old 
and  frail  —  some  of  them  mere  hollow  shells  that 
might  have  housed  a  dryad  or  a  satyr.  They  stood 
well  apart  from  each  other,  the  undergrowth  and 
dead  wood  carefully  trimmed  away  from  their  roots. 

"  See  how  well  cared  for  the  forest  patriarchs 
are,"  said  Patsy.  "  They  must  be  kept  alive  as 
long  as  possible,  like  some  old  people,  because 
they  are  the  main  support  of  the  community." 

Gold-tipped  arrows  of  sunlight  now  began  to 
pierce  the  thick  green  shadows  of  the  forest,  and 
striking  the  old  trunks  and  the  heavy  lower 
branches  brought  out  their  wonderful  tints. 

"  Look  at  those  gorgeous  rainbow  trees!  See 
the  colors, —  mother  of  pearl,  carmine,  violet, 
lavender, —  what  does  it  mean?  "  I  cried. 

It  meant,  I  found,  that  this  was  the  cork  forest, 
and  that  the  bark  of  the  cork  trees  had  lately  been 
cut.  Those  rainbow  colors  soon  fade,  however, 
like  the  pink  and  white  complexion  of  youth. 

At  the  next  station  stood  many  cars  laden  with 
rough  cork. 

"  The  coarse,  outer  layers  are  used  for  fishing 
nets  and  life  preservers.  To  even  things  up," 
Patsy  explained,  "  they  keep  the  fine,  inner 
pinkish  layers  to  bottle  up  those  two  great  life 
destroyers,  the  drugs  and  liquors  of  the  world." 

The  way  now  led  over  the  Sierra  Rondena, 
through  the  wildest,  most  beautiful  part  of  An- 
dalusia; past  thickets  of  gum  cistus,  covered  with 
glorious,  golden-hearted,  white  blossoms;  across 
green  vegas  enamelled  with  clumps  of  amber 
gorse;  through  waves  of  daisies,  white  and  yellow, 
regiments  of  scarlet  poppies  marching  through 
the  pale  green  wheat,  multitudes  of  cornflowers, 
morning  glories,  and  ruby-headed  alfalfa,  king 
of  all  the  handsome  clover  tribe.  In  this  company 
of  old  friends  a  stranger  flower  stooped  through 
the  fields,  half  drooping,  half  mourning,  a  purple 
hood  pulled  over  its  head  almost  hiding  the  small 
blue  bells  hanging  from  the  bending  stalk.  In  that 
holiday  crowd  it  looked  like  a  hooded  monk,  a 
purple  penitente  at  a  carnival.  I  could  never  learn 
its  true  name,  so  we  called  it  the  Spanish  Friar.  .  . 

"  Lift  thine  eyes,  oh,  lift  thine  eyes  to  the 
mountains,  whence  coineth  help!  "  sang  Patsy. 

Intoxicated  with  the  flower  feast,  the  way  had 
brought  us  within  sight  of  the  distant  Sierras 
without  our  being  aware.  The  mountains  came 
to  meet  us,  nearer,  nearer;  then,  all  at  once,  we 
were  in  their  midst;  the  tall  blue  peaks  came 
crowding  all  about  us.  As  the  engine  panted 
"  up,  up  "  the  mountain  pass,  the  way  crossed  a 
flashing  mountain  torrent  leaping  down,  down  to 
the  vega  and  the  sea  beyond;  it  looked  more  like 
a  river  of  emeralds  and  snow  than  mere  green 
water  and  white  foam. 

"  Andalusia,  once  Vandalusia,  named  for  the 
Vandals,  who  tarried  here  before  their  wild  dash 
across  the  Alps  down  into  Italy.  Andalusia, 
'  ultima  terrse '  of  the  ancients,  the  uttermost 
parts  of  the  earth,  where  good  old  Jonah  longed 
to  flee,  small  blame  to  him,"  Patsy  maundered  on, 
sleepily  giving  us  bits  of  guidebook  information. 

"Andalusia,  Vandalusia,  Vandalusia,  Andalusia.  '* 
The  wheels  sang  it  like  a  lullaby.  "  Anda " 
"  Ronda,  Ronda!  "  cried  the  guard.  We  rubbed 
our  eyes,  snatched  our  belongings,  tumbled  out  of 
the  compartment  to  the  platform,  and  almost 
into  the  arms  of  the  Sibyl  of  Ronda,  patiently 
waiting  for  us  there,  like  Fate.  She  was  a  tiny 
old  woman,  draped  like  a  Tanagra  statuette,  in 
veils  of  soft,  rusty  black :  her  face  was  like  a  damask 
rose  that  has  withered  on  its  stalk;  the  eyes  alone, 
diamond  bright,  were  young,  full  of  fire.  With  a 
tremulous  hand  she  offered  J.  a  box  of  matches. 
An  officious  young  man,  with  oiled  hair  and  a 
green  cravat,  pushed  her  rudely  aside.  She  was 
not  to  trouble  the  gentlefolk,  responsibility  for 
whose  welfare  in  Ronda  he  assumed.  Was  he 
not  the  "  offeecial  "  guide  ?  Did  he  not  speak 
English  ? 

'  We  can  speak  English  ourselves,  and  we  don't 
want  a  guide,"  J.  interposed.  '  We  want  a 
philosopher  and  friend.  If  we  must  have  some- 
body to  toot  us  about,  I  vote  we  take  the  Sibyl." 

'  What  ?  Prefer  an  old  thing  like  that  to  an 
active  young  man  like  me  ?  "  The  official  guide 
was  incredulous! 

"  Isn't  she  a  little  old  ?  "  I  ventured. 

"  Did  you  ever  see  handsomer  wrinkles  ?  They 
are  perfectly  classic,"  said  J. 

"  And  the  twinkle  in  her  eye!  "  Patsy  supported 
him.  "  Wrinkles  and  twinkles  against  stall-fed 
guidebookery  ?  The  old  girl  for  me.  She's  over 
eighty,  she  says;  she  was  born  in  Ronda;  has  lived 
here  all  her  life.  She  must  know  more  about  it 
than  that  Algerine  pirate  with  the  emerald  tie. 
Past  eighty,  you  said,  didn't  you  ?  " 

"  Ochanta  dos;  perro  en  Ronda  los  ombres  a 
ochanta  son  pollones"  the  Sibyl  answered.  I  am 
eighty-two,  but  in  Ronda  men  of  eighty  are  only 
chickens. 

"  I  understand  her  Spanish! "  cried  Patsy. 
"  That  settles  it;  sealed  to  the  Sibyl  !  I'll 
go  bond  she  will  let  us  in  for  something  worth 
seeing."  As  usual,  Patsy  and  J.  had  their  way,  and 
the  active  young  man,  angry  and  chapfallen, 
watched  us  with  a  sinister  look,  as  we  pottered 
slowly  along  beside  the  Sibyl.  Our  guides  were 
mostly  chosen  for  beauty,  or  charm.  On  the 
whole  the  plan  worked  well  enough. 

The  Romans  showed  their  usual  colossal  com- 
mon sense  in  choosing  the  site  of  Arunda.  Rome 
always  was  the  model  city  they  kept  in  mind.  Three 
things,  they  rightly  held,  were  necessary  to  a  city; 
a  not  too  distant  view  of  mountains,  to  uplift  the 
soul  of  the  citizen;  a  fine  climate  to  stimulate  his 
body;  a  river  for  boys  to  swim  and  fish  in,  and  for 
men  to  traffic  by.  When  they  found  this  high,  fertile 
plain  shut  in  by  an  amphitheatre  of  mountains, 
with  one  lone  hill  in  the  midst,  surrounded  and  cut 
in  halves  by  a  rushing  river,  they  built  their  city 
of  Arunda  on  the  cleft,  river-girt  rock  we  call 
Ronda.  The  Moors,  who  cleverly  dovetailed 
their  towns  and  their  civilization  into  what  Rome 
left,  built  their  town  of  Ronda  with  the  ruins  of 
Arunda.  We  found  remains  of  both  Roman  and 
Moorish  walls.  The  modern  town,  built  by  the 
"  Catholic  Kings,"  Ferdinand  and  Isabel,  is  re- 
markable chiefly  for  the  wonderful  view  from  the 
cdameda.  You  look  down  a  sheer  six  hundred  feet 
to  the  green  vega,  and  the  turbulent  river  Guade- 
levin  fretting  and  fuming  below.  After  roaring 
and  raging  through  the  Tajo,  the  deep  chasm  that 
divides  Ronda,  the  river  tumbles  with  a  series  of  mad 
leaps  and  bounds  to  the  plain  beyond.  Cutting 
a  few  antics  with  eddies  and  whirlpools,  Guadelevin 
finally  gets  himself  in  hand,  and  goes  soberly  to 
work;  turns  the  wheels  of  the  old  Moorish  mills, 
makes  flour  for  Ronda,  as  the  Moors  taught  him 
to  do;  lends  his  strength  to  a  new  labor,  for,  marvel 
of  marvels,  old  Moorish  Ronda  is  lighted  by 
electricity.  In  summer,  when  the  river  shrinks 
to  a  mere  thread,  its  waning  power  is  carefully 
husbanded  and  the  water  is  led  by  pipes  to  do  its 
work.  Water,  always  water,  alpha  and  omega 
of  civilization!  No  town  that  could  not  be  well 
supplied  with  water  from  the  snowy  Sierras  or 
from  some  mountain  lake  was  ever  founded  by 
Roman  or  Moor.  Their  wisdom  is  clearer  now 
than  ever  before.  What  city  prospers,  lacking  the 
Siamese  twins  of  successful  manufacture,  water 
power,  and  electricity  ? 

A  flock  of  evil-looking  birds  hovered  over  a 
lonely  thicket  of  tamarisks,  close  by  the  foot  of 
the  wall. 

"  From  there,"  said  the  Sibyl,  pointing  to  the 
tamarisks,  "  they  throw  the  dead  horses  over  the 
walls,  after  the  bull-fights.  The  vultures  soon 
pick  their  bones ! "  Grrrr !  The  ugly  word  spoiled 
the  lovely  view. 

The  Sibyl  lived  in  the  old,  Moorish  part  of  the 
city,  that  is  called  the  Ciudad.  She  led  us  through 
the  steep,  narrow  streets,  pointing  out  the  show 
houses.  Here  lived  the  grim  Moorish  king,  Al- 
moneted.  He  drank  his  wine  from  the  skulls  of 
enemies  whose  heads  he  had  cut  off,  made  into 
goblets,  and  inlaid  with  splendid  jewels.  Patsy, 
in  his  rococo  Spanish,  wondered  if  Almoneted 
had  hoped  to  inherit  the  courage  that  once  flashed 
from  the  sockets  he  stopped  with  emerald  and 
ruby.  The  Sibyl  twinkled  all  over  at  his  sug- 
gestion. 

"  C/aro,"  she  said,  "  it  was  doubtless  his  idea." 

She  showed  us  the  Mina,  an  underground  stair- 
case of  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  steps,  one  for 
every  day  in  the  year,  like  the  churches  in  old  Rome, 
leading  down  to  the  river.  It  was  built  so  that, 
in  case  of  siege,  Ronda  should  not  be  cut  off  from 
water.  Moorish  caution !  The  Romans  of  Arunda 
apparently  never  contemplated  such  a  possibility. 
The  houses  of  the  Ciudad  are  oriental  in  character, 
with  blank,  whitewashed  walls,  and  rare,  grated 
windows;  they  are  all  built  to  look  as  much  alike  as 
possible,  in  order  to  avoid  attracting  attention. 
The  doors  are  the  only  distinguishing  feature; 
all  of  them  are  massive,  and  built  for  defence; 
some  are  of  walnut,  some  of  oak,  iron  barred, 
iron  bound,  studded  with  bronze  bosses  or  brass 
ornaments.  Oh,  redoubtable  doors  of  old  Ronda! 
What  stores  of  wealth,  what  moons  of  beauty  did 
you  guard  for  the  jealous  Moors  that  made 
you? 

The  Sibyl  understood  all  Patsy  meant  but  could 
not  say.  The  moment  their  eyes  met,  flash,  flash, 
a  secret  code  was  established  between  them. 
Thanks  to  her,  one  of  those  mysterious  doors  was 
opened  to  us,  and  we  saw  the  interior  of  one  of  those 
old  Moorish  houses,  whose  key,  perhaps,  is 
treasured  by  some  Moor  of  Morocco  to-day,  for 
when  they  were  driven  back  to  Africa,  the  Moors 
took  the  keys  of  their  houses  in  Andalusia  and 
Granada  with  them,  against  the  day  they  should 
return  and  reclaim  their  lost  paradise.  These 
keys  have  been  handed  down  from  generation  to 
generation;   some   of   them   hang   to-day   in   the 
Moorish  houses  of  Tangiers  and  Tetuan. 

When  we  were  tired  with  much  sightseeing,  the 
Sibyl  hospitably  took  us  home  to  rest.  In  the 
patio  of  her  house  we  found  enchanting  Moorish 
columns  with  slender  shafts,  and  capitals  that 
must  have  been  copied  from  the  Corinthian  capi- 
tals the  Romans  used  so  much  in  Spain,  only 
these  are  lighter  and  less  formal,  and  have  more 
feeling  of  the  lovely  form  of  the  curling  acanthus 
leaf.  The  patio,  a  survival  of  the  Roman  atrium, 
is  an  open  court  in  the  middle  of  the  house,  sur- 
rounded by  a  roofed  corridor,  where,  during  the 
warm  weather,  the  life  of  an  Andalusian  family 
centres.  In  the  Sibyl's  patio  stood  an  old  Moorish 
well  with  an  Arabic  inscription.  I  cast  longing 
eyes  at  it. 

*  Whatever  you  see,"  said  J.,  "  admire  nothing 
that  can  be  carried  off  by  the  modern  Vandals, 
who  have  looted  Italy  and  are  looting  Spain.     If 
you  do,  she'll  sell  it." 

*  The  old  Vandals  were  a  decent  lot  in  com- 
parison," Patsy  agreed.     "  History  has  maligned 
them.     If  they  did  *  lift '   a  little  property  now 
and  again,  they,  at  least,  left  the  owners  the  privi- 
lege of  enjoying  a  virtuous    indignation!     These 
modern    buyers,    spoilers,    barbarians,    buy    the 
victim's  consent,  add  ignominy  to  spoiliation!  " 

A  pair  of  goldfinches  gossipped  about  their 
housekeeping  in  a  wattle  cage  hung  near  the  old 
Moorish  well.  A  lemon  tree  in  a  glazed  earthen- 
ware pot  (it  had  one  green  lemon)  and  some 
gorgeous  double  carnations,  variegated  dark  red 
and  yellow,  planted  in  a  petroleum  can,  stood 
close  to  the  well  where  they  could  be  easily  watered. 
As  she  passed,  the  Sibyl  pinched  off  a  dead  leaf 
with  a  touch  that  was  a  caress, —  these  were  her 
growing  things,  this  was  her  pleasaunce. 

In  the  living-room,  which  was  the  kitchen,  too, 
was  a  quaint,  carved  stone  fireplace.  On  the  bal- 
cony outside  was  a  gilt  iron  grill,  surmounted  by  a 
battered  pomegranate  "  final,"  sure  some  day  to 
find  its  way  into  a  "  collection."  The  house  was 
clean,  in  spite  of  the  horde  of  children  it  sheltered, 
the  Sibyl's  great-grandchildren,  for  whose  sake 
she  sells  matches  at  Ronda  station. 

The  mother  sat  on  a  low  stool  rocking  a  wooden 
cradle  with  her  foot;  her  hands  were  busy  shelling 
garbanzoz,  chickpeas,  for  the  olla.  Twin  infants, 
lusty  as  Romulus  and  Remus,  slept  in  the  cradle; 
a  pair  of  babes  a  size  larger  played  with  each  other's 
toes  in  a  long,  bath-shaped,  wicker  basket;  a  girl 
of  five  pretended  to  help  her  mother  with  the 
garbanzoz.  As  we  entered,  the  mother  rose,  wel- 
comed us  with  grave  ceremony,  offered  us  food  and 
drink  and  assured  us  that  this  house  and  everything 
it  contained  was  ours:  "  Esta  muy  a  la  disposition 
de  Vmd"  It  is  very  much  at  your  disposal,  the 
pretty  old  phrase  goes. 

Her  face  was  plain  beside  the  Sibyl's,  time  had 
etched  every  line  there  with  an  artist's  fine  care, 
but  she  had  the  grace,  the  reserve,  the  proud 
bearing  of  the  Andaluz  that  poets  have  praised 
before,  and  since,  De  Musset,  whose  Andaluz 
lived  in  Barcelona,  and  was  a  Catalan,  after  all. 
As  the  youngsters  were  very  near  of  an  age,  when 
the  mother  offered  to  give  us  everything  in  sight  I 
asked  if  she  could  spare  a  baby?  She  looked 
almost  pretty  as  she  unbent,  smiled,  patted  the 
biggest,  and  answered,  with  a  twinkle  like  the  old 
woman's,  that  there  were  none  too  many  —  indeed, 
that  there  were  four  more  at  school. 

"Nine  children,  what  a  fine  large  family!" 
The  Sibyl  shrugged  her  shoulders,  rolled  up  her 
eyes,  and  lifted  a  withered  hand  to  heaven  in 
protest. 

"  Granny  doesn't  think  it  much  of  a  family; 
she  had  seven  boys  and  seven  girls." 

"  It  is  true,"  the  Sibyl  nodded,  and  stroked  her 
lean  flanks  with  tremulous  hands;  "  this,"  she 
looked  at  her  grandchild  as  if  she  expected  great 
things  of  her,  "  is  the  seventh  daughter  of  my 
seventh  daughter." 

When,  our  visit  over,  we  rose  to  take  leave, 
spokesman  Patsy  produced  the  phrase  from  his 
vocabulary  that  he  had  been  conning: 

"  Muchas  memorias.    Adios." 

The  Andaluz  put  this  aside  as  too  final. 
"  Hasta  luego"  she  said,  with  her  slow,  sweet 
smile, —  "  Till  we  meet  again." 

'*  Vamos!  "  said  the  Sibyl,  and  showed  the  way 
to  the  door. 

As  we  left  the  house  of  many  children,  we  met 
a  cavalcade  of  gay  young  people  riding  out  of  town. 
The  men  rode  horses,  the  girls  mules  or  donkeys. 
The  woman's  saddle  was  curiously  made  with 
crisscross  arms  and  a  back  like  an  armchair. 
They  were  evidently  well  to  do  farmer  folk;  all 
wore  good  clothes  and  were  well  mounted.  Several 
of  them  had  ruddy,  northern  complexions.  The 
Sibyl  laid  this  to  the  excellent  climate, — "  In 
Ronda,  we  do  not  know  when  it  is  summer," 
she  said.  The  last  of  the  cavalcade  to  pass  was 
a  large,  gray  mule  with  as  pretty  a  couple  as  you 
might  see,  seated  on  his  broad  back.  We  felt 
sure  they  were  bride  and  groom.  The  man,  a 
handsome  fellow,  full  of  the  lust  of  life,  sat  very 
straight  in  saddle;  the  slim  girl  on  the  pillion 
behind,  her  arm  about  his  waist,  was  full  of  bridal 
coquetries.  She  wore  red  stockings,  a  rose  be- 
hind her  ear,  a  lace-trimmed  petticoat.  An  old, 
yellowish,  time-worn  guitar  was  slung  over  her 
shoulders  by  a  cherry  ribbon.  As  they  rode  past 
us,  both  young  people  smiled  and  nodded  to  the 
Sibyl. 

"  Your  friends  ?  "  Patsy  asked. 

"  My  relatives."  Proud  that  we  should  se^e 
them,  and  that  they  should  see  us,  her  face  kindled; 
so  did  Patsy's.  We  all  walked  on  through  the 
tortuous  Moorish  calle  with  a  lighter  step,  a  braver 
heart  for  that  chance  meeting.  It  seemed  as  if  we 
had  caught  some  reflection  of  the  hope,  health, 
and  love  shining  in  their  young  faces. 

"  I  play  the  guitar  myself,  after  a  fashion,  not 
Spanish  fashion,  alack!  "  said  Patsy.  "  Shade  of 
Espinal!  I  won't  leave  Ronda  till  I  have  had  a 
lesson.  He  lived  here,  Espinal,  who  gave  the 
fifth  string,  perfected  the  guitar,  made  it  what  it  is — 
what  it  can  be  in  a  Spaniard's  hands." 

A  tall,  arrogant-looking  priest,  with  head  held 
high,  passed  at  this  moment  and  challenged  us 
with  the  eye,  as  the  British  officer  had  challenged 
us  at  Gibraltar.  It  seemed  that  he  was  master 
here,  as  that  other  had  been  master  on  the  Rock. 

"  If  I  were  a  priest  of  Ronda  I  should  hold  up 
my  head,"  said  Patsy,  "  just  because  Espinal  v/as 
a  priest.  He  did  other  things  worth  doing  beside 
giving  us  the  fifth  string:  invented  the  decima, 
wrote  a  book,  Marcus  de  Obregan,  that's  read  to- 
day, three  hundred  years  after;  translated  Horace 
—  a  pleasant  task  —  lived  to  be  eight  years  older 
than  the  Sibyl,  died  at  ninety,  still  in  the  ring, 
still  fighting.  I  like  Ronda;  let's  buy  a  house  and 
settle  here!  " 

"  Almoneted's  house  for  choice,"  said  J.,  and 
they  began  alloting  quarters  forthwith.  The 
window  with  the  north  light  should  be  the  studio, 
the  room  on  the  courtyard  far  from  noise,  the 
library.  In  every  town  we  visited,  and  they 
approved  of,  they  made  plans  for  passing  the  rest 
of  our  lives  there. 

The  convent  chapel  smelt  of  lavender.  The 
sunlight  pouring  through  the  rose  window  over  the 
high  altar  was  so  strong  that  you  saw  tiny  motes 
floating  in  the  sunbeams.  They  could  not  have 
been  dust,  for  the  chapel  was  immaculate,  a  tem- 
ple of  purity  from  the  worn  marble  flags  under  foot 
to  the  swinging  silver  lamps  overhead,  all  freshly 
trimmed  like  the  lamps  of  the  wise  virgins.  The 
Virgin's  lace  handkerchief  was  a  triumph  of  clear 
starching.  She  was  dressed  in  black  and  wore 
only  a  few  of  her  jewels  —  the  Sibyl  said  —  be- 
cause it  was  Lent;  we  should  see  her  at  Easter! 
The  Virgin's  velvet  dress  was  in  the  style  of  the 
sixteenth  century;  she  wore  a  hoop,  a  ruff,  and  a 
long  pointed  bodice. 

The  Sibyl  was  not  devout.     She  took  the  holy 
water  to  cross  herself,  mechanically,  and  made 
the  most  indifferent  little  duck  for  a  courtesy  as 
she  passed  before  the  altar.  She  looked  with 
a  cold  eye  on  dear  San  Antonio  di  Padua, 
though  he  must  be  popular  in  Ronda,  from  the 
number  of  candles  burning  before  him.  Her 
indifference  was  in  marked  contrast  to  the  piety 
of  two  freshly  powdered  young  ladies,  who  were 
coming  out  of  the  chapel  as  we  entered.  They 
were  of  the  great  world;  their  combs  and  shoes 
were  unquestionably  from  Paris. 

:<  But  the  eyes,  the  eyes  are  Andalusian,  and  the 
torrents  of  black  hair  piled  and  puffed  under  those 
blessed  black  mantillas!  "  murmured  Patsy,  as 
they  passed,  smelling  sweet  of  heliotrope  and  rice 
powder.  The  taller  had  a  rosary  of  gold  and 
pearls  in  her  left  hand,  a  fan  in  the  right;  the 
pearls  slipped  through  her  fingers,  her  lips  moved; 
she  was  evidently  "  telling  her  beads/'  As  they 
passed  the  statue  of  Santa  Teresa,  both  knelt 
and  crossed  themselves  with  extraordinary  rever- 
ence. 

"  Remember  what  Don  Jaime  said,"  Patsy 
reminded  us;  "  that  the  common  people  of  Spain 
take  their  religion  very  easily;  everybody  did 
when  he  was  young,  till  the  Queen  Mother  made 
it  fashionable  to  be  devote,  when  she  came  to  Spain, 
bringing  back  the  Jesuits  and  all  the  rest  of  them 
in  her  train.  As  a  boy,  the  Don  never  remembers 
having  seen  a  monk  or  a  nun." 

In  spite  of  her  "  indifference,"  the  Sibyl  had 
held  stanchly  to  her  proposal  that  we  should  visit  the 
convent  where  she  had  learned  to  sew  and  to  em- 
broider. Mass  was  just  over,  the  priest  had  left 
the  altar,  the  sacristan  was  snuffing  out  the  candles. 
We  had  a  glimpse  of  black  veiled  figures  passing 
slowly  behind  the  altar  from  one  unseen  chamber 
to  another;  they  were  followed  by  slighter,  more 
lightly  moving  figures  in  white  that  flitted  ethere- 
ally where  the  others  walked  solidly.  Two  by  two 
they  passed  behind  the  altar  with  a  noiseless  step. 
When  the  last  one  had  vanished,  the  priest  and  the 
sacristan  disappeared  into  the  sacristy,  and  we 
were  left  alone,  with  San  Antonio  and  the  other 
saints. 

One  end  of  the  chapel  was  shut  off  by  two 
heavy  iron  gratings,  one  behind  the  other.  On 
the  other  side  of  the  grill  was  a  close-latticed 
screen,  through  which  we  could  see  a  heavy,  black 
curtain ;  the  movement  of  the  folds  showed  that  we 
were  being  watched  by  some  one  on  the  other  side 
of  the  triple  barrier.  After  a  short  delay  a  novice 
slipped  quietly  into  the  chapel,  a  sprite  of  a  girl 
with  bright  eyes  and  rosy  cheeks,  dressed  in  white 
serge  and  crisp  linen.  She  asked  us  for  "alms  for 
the  Holy  Sacrament."  Patsy  produced  our  offering. 

The  little  novice's  eyes  opened  roundly  as  her 
small  red  hand  closed  on  the  coin;  she  courtesied, 
so  prettily,  and  flitted  away  as  lightly  as  she  came. 
As  she  passed  the  grill,  she  breathed  some  word 
of  necromancy  —  it  sounded  like  "  blankichisser- 
ando."  Then,  silently,  the  black  curtain  was 
withdrawn;  we  saw  a  stout  red  porteress  with  a 
bunch  of  huge  keys  in  her  hand,  a  key  turned 
grudgingly  in  a  rusty  lock,  a  hinge  squeaked,  the 
lattice  parted,  the  convent  walls  flew  back!  We 
had  a  glimpse  of  veiled  figures  flying  helter  skelter; 
then  through  the  grim,  double  iron  grating  we 
looked  into  the  sanctum  sanctorum  of  the  nuns. 
A  long,  lonely  room  with  rows  of  uncomfortably 
narrow,  high-backed  benches  and  narrow  tables, 
over  which  hung  some  good  crystal  chandeliers 
filled  with  wax  candles.  Though  it  shone  with 
neatness,  it  was  the  most  cheerless  living-room 
imaginable.  In  the  middle,  close  to  the  grating, 
stood  a  tall,  graceful  woman,  who  looked  like  a 
Vestal  of  ancient  Rome.  Her  taper,  aristocratic 
hands  were  folded  in  a  clasp  that  suggested 
strength  rather  than  meekness;  her  small  head, 
finely  set  upon  the  shoulders,  was  held  high  and 
proudly. 

*  The  Abbess  wishes  to  speak  with  you,"  whis- 
pered the  Sibyl. 

"How  long,"  asked  the  Abbess  —  her  voice  like 
a  far  away  chime  of  silver  bells, —  "  how  long  do 
you  remain  in  Ronda  ?  " 

I  said  our  stay  was  short,  no  one  had  told  us 
how  much  there  was  to  see  in  Ronda. 

*  There    is    but    one    Ronda    in    the    world," 
she  said.     The  bells  sounded  nearer.     The  Sibyl 
nodded  agreement.     "  It  is  the  truth,"  she  mur- 
mured. 

'  You  are  of  Ronda  ?  "  t  made  out  to  ask. 
The  Abbess  shook  her  head,  and  answered  with 
a  splendid  pride,  "  Soy  hija  di  Granada "  (I  am 
a  daughter  of  Granada),  as  if  that  were  the  proudest 
title  in  the  world.  There  was  more  bronze  than 
silver  in  the  bells  now. 

*  What  is  the  work  you  do  in  the  convent  ?  " 

*  We  pray  for  the  entire  world."     Her  voice 
all  silver  again.    Then,  as  an  after-thought  and  of 
far  less  consequence : 

*  We  have  a  school  of  needlework.     Our  em- 
broidery is  not  unknown  outside  of  Ronda;  it  has 
been   heard   of   even  outside   of  Spain."     I   felt 
abashed  that  I  had  not  heard  of  it. 

*  You  will,  perhaps,  return  to  Ronda  for  the 
fair   in    May?     Many    strangers   are   here   then. 
Should  you  come  back  we  shall  always  be  glad  to 
see  you  at  the  convent." 

We  felt  that  we  were  dismissed.     I  thanked  the 
Abbess  as  best  I  could,  in  my  halting  Spanish,  for 
her  courtesy.  She  smiled  a  cold,  holy  smile;  her 
last  words  were  a  benediction : 

"  Vayan  Vds.  con  Dios!  " 

I  had  a  glimpse  of  the  little  novice  standing  on 
tiptoe  looking  at  Patsy  over  the  Abbess's  shoulder, 
with  round,  bright  eyes,  then  the  black  curtains 
drew  noiselessly  together,  the  stout  red  porteress 
shut  the  wooden  lattice  with  a  loud  clang,  and 
turned  the  protesting  key  in  the  lock.  The  cold 
beauty  of  the  Abbess,  the  fresh  comeliness  of  the 
novice,  were  hidden  behind  the  triple  barrier: 
curtain,  lattice,  and  cruel  iron  bars  in  double 
rank.  No  outstretched  hand  from  within  that 
grating  could  ever  touch  another  hand  reaching 
to  meet  it  from  the  other  side. 

*  We  shall  come  back  to  Ronda  for  the  fair," 
said  Patsy,  cheerfully,  as  he  took  leave  of  the  Sibyl 
at  the  station.  "  If  not  this  year,  another  year. 
The  Abbess  has  invited  us :  mind  that  you  are  here 
to  meet  us  at  the  train !  " 

The  Sibyl  smiled,  a  brave,  old,  withered  smile, 
and  waved  her  tiny,  wrinkled  hand : 

"  Hasta  otra  vista!  " 

She  would  do  her  best  to  keep  the  tryst! 

Chapter Ill  THE  WHITE  VEIL 

CONCEPCION  sitting  in  the  patio  under  a 
golden  shower  of  yellow  Bankshire  roses! 
That  was  our  first  impression  of  Seville.  Pember- 
ton,  tall  and  lean,  stood  beside  her,  nervously 
twirling  his  stick.  We  hurried  down  to  the  court- 
yard; introductions  followed. 

"  Mes  amigos,  Concepcion.  She  doesn't  speak 
a  word  of  English  —  all  the  better  for  your  Spanish. 
She  is  Sevilliana  born.  We  will  do  our  best  be- 
tween us  to  show  you  the  town  in  —  how  many 
days  or  hours  do  you  mean  to  stay  ?  " 

"  Weeks  or  months,  rather;  you  don't  know 
what  you  are  letting  yourself  in  for,"  warned  J. 

"  The  longer  the  better.  Concepcion  is  some- 
times busy  with  the  children,  housekeeping,  or 
millinery.  I  never  have  anything  to  do." 

Concepcion  welcomed  us  with  soft  eyes,  a 
gracious  flurry  of  civilities,  glanced  at  her  watch, 
and  looked  meaningly  at  Pemberton. 

"Yes,"    he    said,    "it's    time    to    start.     The 
ceremony  of  Rending  the  White  Veil,  the  first 
act  of  the  drama,  begins  at  ten  o'clock." 

It  was  the  Wednesday  of  Holy  Week.  We  had 
timed  our  arrival  in  Seville  with  an  eye  to  that 
service.  Had  it  not  been  for  Concepcion,  we 
might  have  missed  it,  after  all.  It  was  wonderful 
enough  to  sit  in  the  patio  with  the  paired  Moorish 
columns,  the  green  and  blue  azulejos,  listening  to 
the  fountain,  and  the  green  love-birds  in  their 
gilded  cage,  looking  at  Concepcion,  her  little  feet 
tucked  under  her  chair,  her  fan  gently  agitated,  her 
mantilla  almost  as  black  as  her  curls. 

Outside,  in  the  Plaza  del  Pacifico,  the  sun  lay 
hot  on  the  tawny  earth;  among  the  glossy  green 
leaves  of  the  orange  trees,  golden  fruit  and  waxen 
blossom  hung  side  by  side.  The  air  was  sweet 
with  the  smell  of  them.  A  little  boy  took  off  his 
jacket  and  fluttered  it  like  a  muleta  (the  matador's 
red  cloak)  in  his  companion's  face.  In  a  moment 
the  two  boys  were  hard  at  it  —  playing  at  bull- 
fighting. We  lingered  to  watch  them. 

"  Seville  is  even  better  than  I  remembered," 
said  Patsy.  "  I  must  have  been  here  before  (I 
knew  that  he  had  not) ;  I  seem  to  have  known  it 
all  my  life.  What  a  lot  of  our  friends,  dead  and 
alive,  came  from  here!  The  Emperor  Trajan 
was  a  Sevilliano,  so  were  Don  Juan  and  Velas- 
quez, so  is  Villegas.  Figaro,  brass  basin,  white 
apron,  and  all,  met  us  at  the  gate  last  night  when 
we  arrived,  and  ran  beside  the  carriage,  pointing 
out  the  black  arrows  at  the  corners  showing  the 
way." 

Was  Rossini  ever  in  Seville  ?  Not  that  it  signi- 
fies; he  devined  it  all,  if  he  did  not  see  it.  His 
creatures,  Figaro,  Rosina,  Don  Bartolo,  are  of  the 
glorious  company  of  its  ghosts. 

Seville  is  a  siren  city.  The  river  Guadalquiver 
throws  an  arm  about  her;  genius,  when  it  may, 
follows  suit  and  embraces  the  darling  of  Andalusia. 

'  I'll  show  you  Figaro's  barber  shop  some  day," 
said  Pemberton  over  his  shoulder.  "  It's  near  my 
place.  Yes,  I'm  a  householder.  You  know  the 
proverb  ?  *  Whom  God  loves,  he-  gives  a  house 
in  Seville.'  " 

"  Find  us  one,  and  we'll  settle  here,  too!  "  Patsy 
exclaimed. 

*  We  will  talk  about  that  later,"  said  Pemberton. 
"  Now,  I  am  taking  you  to  the  cathedral.  Before 
you  see  it,  I  ask  you  to  consider  the  immortal 
resolution  passed  by  its  founders  before  the  first 
stone  was  laid.  '  Let  us  build,'  they  resolved,  *  a 
monument  that  shall  make  posterity  declare  that 
we  were  mad.'  That  was  a  good  bluff,  wasn't  it  ?  " 

6  The  only  thing  about  posterity  that  you  can 
bank  on,"  Patsy  sagely  put  in,  "  is  that  it  won't 
say  what  is  expected  of  it!  " 

"  Claro!  Posterity,  you  and  I  and  Concepcion 
here,  say  those  men  were  the  sanest  of  their 
time.  They,  their  architects,  and  their  artists 
support  this  city  to-day.  I  don't  know  how  the 
taxes  could  get  paid  without  the  money  you 
travelers  bring.  The  cathedral  is  the  thing  that 
draws  you,  and  the  pageants  and  fiestas  —  they 
have  all  grown  up  out  of  it,  are  part  and  parcel 
of  it.  The  '  monument '  of  those  *  madmen ' 
is  the  Heart  of  Seville.  I  wish  we  had  a  few  such 
lunatics  at  home.  They  only  thought  about  build- 
ing the  house  of  God.  We  waste  ourselves  in 
inventing  ingenious  devices  for  heating  and  light- 
ing the  churches  of  men,  and  let  slip  the  great 
opportunity!" 

We  were  walking,  while  Pemberton  poured  out 
his  vehement  torrent  of  talk,  through  a  narrow, 
twisting  calle,  innocent  of  sidewalks,  between  tall 
Morisco  houses  with  openwork  gates,  catching 
tantalizing  glimpses  of  patios  where  roses  riot, 
fountains  sing,  cedars  whisper.  If  there  be  jealour 
iron-bound  doors  in  gracious  Seville,  like  those  of 
grim,  old  Moorish  Ronda,  they  stand  hospitably 
ajar.  As  we  turned  a  corner,  Pemberton  stopped 
us  with  a  gesture : 

"  Look,"  he  said,  "  the  Giralda!  " 

Across  a  plaza  where  fringed  palms  rustle,  at  the 
end  of  a  calle  still  in  faint  lilac  shadow,  stood  a 
tall  square  tower  of  tenderest  rose  color.  The 
Giralda,  once  the  minaret  of  old  Abu  Yacob's 
mosque,  dominates  Seville  as  the  Giglio  of  Giotto 
dominates  Florence,  by  its  imperial  right  of  beauty. 
The  bronze  Victory  on  the  summit  turned  lightly 
with  the  breeze;  her  Roman  helmet,  her  standard, 
and  the  olive  branch  in  her  hand  sharply  etched 
against  the  fiery  blue  sky.  In  the  belfry  the  old 
green  bells  — all  Christians  baptized  —  San  Miquel, 
el  Cantor,  Santa  Maria,  la  Gorda,  swung  to  and 
fro,  calling  the  people  to  prayer  as  their  prede- 
cessor, the  muezzin,  once  called  them. 

"  It  is  very  late,"  murmured  Concepcion.  She 
spoke  slowly,  distinctly;  I  understood  her  then 
and  after.  My  Spanish  was  "  coming  back  to 
me : "  at  sixteen  I  could  chatter  like  a  magpie  in 
West  Indian  Castilian.  We  hurried  on,  losing 
the  Giralda  to  find  it  again  standing  like  a  tafi 
sentinel  beside  the  cathedral.  •  This  was  our 
first  meeting  with  Gothic  architecture  in  Spain. 
The  pure  lines  of  pointed  window  and  door,  the 
airy,  flying  buttresses,  the  graceful  parapet  crown- 
ing the  roof  rose  stately  above  us,  solemn  and 
inspiring,  a  very  gospel  carven  in  warm  gray  stone. 
*  The  cathedral  is  the  Heart  of  Seville,"  said 
Pemberton,  "  it  is  a  unique  thing.  No  church  in 
Christendom,  no  Greek  temple  or  Buddhist  shrine 
can  compare  with  it.  Not  because  it  is  the  largest 
Gothic  cathedral  and  the  third  largest  church  in 
the  world,  but  because  it  has  breath,  because  it 
is  alive." 

An  aged  beggar,  clean  and  respectable,  lifted 
the  heavy  leathern  curtain  that  hung  over  the  door. 
*  Una  limosna  por  el  amor  de  Dios,"  he  whispered. 
Concepcion  dropped  a  perro  chico  (literally  a  small 
dog,  a  copper  coin  worth  one  cent)  into  his  trem- 
bling old  hand. 

"  Dios  se  lo  paga  a  F.,"  said  the  beggar,  a  neat, 
self-respecting  mendicant  whose  voice  lacked  the 
whine  of  Italy.  God  himself  will  pay  it  to  you ! 

In  the  rich,  dusky  spaces  of  the  nave,  near  the 
puerta  mayor,  a  marble  slab  is  let  into  the  pave- 
ment. Carved  upon  the  slab  are  the  familiar 
device  of  the  three  brave  caravels  and  the  proud 
motto,  "a  Castilla  y  a  Leon,  mundo  nuebo  die  Colon." 
'  This  is  the  tomb  of  that  good  son,  Ferdinand 
Columbus,"  said  Pemberton.  A  cord  tightened 
round  my  heart.  "  That's  a  link  with  the  past 
that  holds,  isn't  it  ?  " 

From  that  moment  it  seemed  as  if  we  all 
caught  fire  from  Pemberton,  saw  through  his  eyes, 
felt  with  his  intensity  of  feeling.  The  sweep- 
ing aisles,  the  steadfast  columns,  the  soaring 
arches  of  that  cathedral  seemed  elemental  things, 
like  their  prototypes,  the  forest  lanes,  the  giants  of 
the  primeval  wood.  We  could  almost  feel  the 
spring  of  pine  needles  underfoot,  smell  the  resin, 
see  the  sunlight  striking  through  the  tops  of  tall 
pines  swaying  together,  arching  the  forest  path. 

"  The  coro,  the  distinguishing  feature  of  Spanish 
cathedrals  —  it  is  like  a  chapel  set  down  in  the 
middle  of  a  church  —  interferes  less  with  the  im- 
pression of  the  whole  building  at  Seville  than  in 
any  other  cathedral  we  saw.  In  the  outer  aisles, 
which  are  free  of  the  coro,  you  have  an  unin- 
terrupted view  of  the  entire  length  of  the  building, 
and  can  realize  its  sublime  proportions,  get  a  sense 
of  the  harmony  of  the  whole;  the  ease  with  which  the 
vast  columns  uphold  the  roof,  and  divide  the  whole 
space  into  its  proper  parts.  In  itself,  the  coro  is 
like  an  exquisitely  wrought  gem  in  a  chaste  and 
simple  setting.  It  is  shut  off  from  the  nave  on  the 
side  of  the  puerta  mayor,  by  a  marble  fa9ade 
containing  fine  bas-reliefs,  and  a  painting  of  the 
Virgin  by  Francesco  Pacheco,  father-in-law  and 
teacher  of  Velasquez.  On  the  side  towards  the 
capilla  mayor  and  the  high  altar,  the  coro  is  isolated 
by  a  magnificent  wrought-iron  screen  where,  high 
up  in  groups  of  threes,  hang  the  golden  mass 
bells.  Around  the  interior  of  the  coro  runs  a 
double  row  of  choir  stalls,  marvels  of  wood  carving, 
in  part  grotesque,  where  the  carver's  fancy  ran 
riot  and  reproduced  the  faces  of  the  men,  beasts, 
and  devils  that  had  haunted  his  childish  dreams. 
Those  goblin,  demon  heads  are  carved  low  down, 
where  the  hand  rests,  the  knees  push.  They  are 
worn  away,  polished  smooth  by  the  rubbing  of 
the  palms  and  the  calves  of  generations  of  monks. 
Safe  above,  where  the  uplifted  eye  strikes,  are 
the  heavenly  visions,  —  angels,  saints,  prophets,  the 
Virgin  in  glory,  fresh  as  the  day  old  Nufro  Sanchez 
carved  them.  In  the  middle  of  the  coro  stands  the 
tall  facistol  holding  the  yellow  vellum  music  books 
open  at  the  page  where  the  monkish  illuminators 
painted  their  most  beautiful  miniatures. 

"  There's  Villegas's  picture,"  J.  whispered,  as 
we  passed  the  coro,  "  the  old  choirmaster  holding  up 
his  baton,  scolding  the  choristers.  I  know  every 
inch  of  this  church;  there's  not  a  corner  he  has  not 
painted." 

"  And  how  he  has  painted  it!  "  sighed  Pember- 
ton;  "  as  a  man  paints  the  portrait  of  his  mother. 
How  you  feel  the  artists,  dead  and  alive,  who  have 
worked  here;  that's  part  of  the  fascination  of  the 
place." 

"  Put  the  camp  chairs  there,"  said  Concepcion. 
She  had  found  us  the  perfect  position,  between  the 
coro  and  the  capilla  mayor.  "  Did  he  tell  you 
that  screen  is  gilded  with  the  first  gold  that  came 
from  the  Americas  ?  " 

The  ship  that  brought  that  first  gold  must  have 
been  the  size  of  the  Mayflower,  from  the  amount 
of  "  first  gold  "  it  is  supposed  to  have  brought  to 
Spain. 

There  was  no  crowd,  only  a  few  women  dressed, 
like  Concepcion,  all  in  black;  some  poor  bodies, 
a  sprinkling  of  tourists,  and  one  brown  Franciscan. 
The  sunlight  pouring  through  the  painted  window 
of  the  Assumption  stained  the  nearest  columns 
blood-red,  sapphire,  emerald.  In  the  coro,  sombre 
and  rich,  the  crimson  and  scarlet  cloaks  of  the  old 
canons,  sitting  slumbrous  in  the  stalls,  glowed 
like  jewels  in  the  dusk.  Grouped  in  couples 
about  thefacistol  were  the  choir  boys,  their  black- 
letter  scores  held  between  them.  The  high  altar 
of  the  capilla  mayor  was  covered  by  a  thick,  White 
Veil,  that  hung  from  the  groined  roof  to  the  floor. 
Two  by  two  the  tonsured  acolytes  in  long  purple 
gowns,  with  tassels  of  gold  and  violet,  prepared 
for  the  service,  dressed  the  pulpits,  laid  ready  the 
missals.  The  three  officiating  priests  appeared, 
each  preceded  by  a  pair  of  altar  boys  in  scarlet  and 
ivory,  carrying  silver  candlesticks  twice  as  tall  as 
they.  The  priest  at  the  middle  pulpit  was  a  big, 
powerful  man,  with  a  fine  resonant  voice.  His 
intoning  of  the  gospel  was  masterly;  Concepcion 
said  the  finest  in  Seville,  if  not  in  Spain.  The  old 
priest  with  the  delicate,  spiritual  face,  like  a  wax 
mask  with  jewel  eyes,  and  the  high  treble  voice, 
must  have  been  as  good  at  intoning  in  his  day. 

The  little  boys  who  held  the  candles  close  for  his 
old  eyes  to  see,  leaned  towards  him  with  a  pleasant, 
human  tenderness.  It  was  easy  to  see  there  was 
love  in  their  service. 

"  Et  posuit  eum  in  monumento"  the  old  priest 
quavered  out  the  last  words  of  the  story,  as  it  is  told 
by  Luke;  the  three  celebrants  left  the  altar  with 
much  ceremony  of  book  and  bell  and  kiss  ecclesi- 
astical, and  took  their  stand  before  the  white  veiled 
altar;  the  purple  acolytes  swung  their  gold  censers 
till  we  saw  the  glowing  coals;  the  smoke  of  frankin- 
cense and  spice  rose  up  in  clouds.  There  came  a 
moment  of  strained  silence.  The  only  sound  was 
the  clinking  of  the  censer  chains.  The  air  be- 
tween priests  and  people  was  thick  and  blue 
with  incense. 

Brrrrrrrrrrm,  brrrrrrrrrrrm !  The  silence  was 
shattered  by  a  loud  clap  of  thunder,  another  and 
another,  as  if  a  fierce  tempest  had  sprung  up  out- 
side. While  the  thunder  rolled  and  echoed  through 
the  aisles,  the  White  Veil  was  rent  from  top  to 
bottom,  fell  to  the  ground,  and  disappeared  as  if 
by  magic.  In  its  place  hung  the  Black  Veil. 
Before  this  stood  in  studied  attitudes  the  big  priest, 
the  old  priest,  and  a  little  priest.  The  brown 
Franciscan  kneeling  by  the  great  tenabrium  had 
thrown  back  his  head  in  ecstasy. 

"  Look,"    whispered    Pemberton,    "  the    Saint 
Anthony  of  Murillo;  I  will  show  you  the  picture 
in  the  baptistry;  it's  the  one  the  figure  of  Anthony 
was  cut  out  from  and  sent  to  New  York.  They 
have  put  the  piece  back,  but  the  '  joining  '  shows." 

We  came  out  of  the  cathedral  into  the  light  and 
perfume  of  the  Court  of  Oranges,  sat  down  upon 
a  sun-warmed  marble  bench,  and  looked  up  at  the 
pigeons  flitting  about  the  Giralda.  A  little  cloud 
floated  before  the  face  of  the  sun,  a  shadow  fell 
upon  the  fountain. 

"  That  fountain  where  the  women  are  gossiping 
is  the  old  Moorish  midhd,  where  the  musselmen 
washed  before  prayer,  as  I  have  seen  them  do  in 
Turkey.  Women  weren't  allowed  in  the  Court  of 
Oranges  then,"  mused  Pemberton.  '  Where  we 
sit,  the  temples  of  Astarte  and  of  Salambo  once 
stood.  It's  curious  how  you  catch  the  echoes  of 
the  older  religions  in  these  ceremonies  of  Holy 
Week.  Some  of  the  rites  were  practiced  before 
Rome  was.  The  mosque,  the  Moors  who  wor- 
shipped there,  seem  things  of  yesterday,  in  com- 
parison." 

"  Almost  of  to-day,  that  cry,  that  man  are  more 
than  half  Arab." 

"  Agua,  aguafresca!  "  The  cry  twanged  of  the 
Orient.  The  water  seller,  lean  and  brown,  with 
impenetrable  black  velvet  eyes,  turned  into  the 
courtyard.  He  was  dressed  all  in  white,  with 

odd,  hemp-soled  shoes, — a  grave  man  who  offered 
water  from  his  clean  cup,  then  passed  on  his  way, 
his  cry  growing  faint,  fainter,  till  it  was  drowned 
in  the  clangor  of  el  Cantor,  the  great,  green,  bronze 
bell  of  the  Giralda. 

The  afternoon  of  Holy  Wednesday  found  us  in 
the  Plaza  de  la  Constitucion.  Before  the  florid 
fa9ade  of  the  Casa  de  Ayutamiento  a  grand  stand 
had  been  built.  In  the  center  was  a  dais  hung 
with  crimson  velvet,  garlanded  with  flowers.  Under 
a  gold  embroidered  canopy  stood  three  gilded 
thrones. 

"  For  the  King,  the  Queen  Mother,  and  the 
Infanta  Maria  Teresa,"  Concepcion  explained. 
Opposite,  across  the  plaza,  Pemberton  pointed 
out  the  Audienza,  a  handsome  Renaissance  build- 
ing, over  whose  door  were  the  arms  of  Charles  V, 
the  Pillars  of  Hercules  with  the  old  motto  bor- 
rowed from  the  old  hero,  ne  plus  ultra.  A  marble 
column  shows  where  the  public  executions  once 
took  place.  The  plaza,  scene  of  tournaments, 
bull-fights,  and  carnival  fetes,  was  crowded  by 
those  who  could  afford  the  best  seats  for  the  pro- 
cessions of  penitence,  the  famous  pageants  of 
Holy  Week.  The  audience  assembled  in  twos  and 
threes,  the  dark,  full-bosomed  Andalusian  women, 
with  fan  and  mantilla,  the  men  in  uniform  or 
afternoon  dress.  In  a  neighboring  box  sat  a 
young  girl   with  a    lovely   oval    face,   masses   of 
wavy  black  hair,  and  eyes  like  cool,  brown  agates. 

"  That  is  Luz,"  said  Pemberton,  "  called  the 
prettiest  girl  in  Seville."  He  looked  at  Con- 
cepcion  as  he  said  it. 

*  There  is  a  woman  who  is  as  beautiful,"  I  said, 
truthfully,  and  knew  that  Pemberton  was  my 
friend  for  life. 

Luz  had  many  visitors  (the  seats  in  her  box  were 
never  empty),  they  came  and  went  like  moths 
about  a  candle.  One  remained,  a  monk  in  a  brown 
habit,  the  Franciscan  of  the  cathedral.  In  spite 
of  his  rope  girdle,  his  bare  sandaled  feet,  he  had 
once  belonged  to  that  world  of  fashion  where  Luz 
rules,  and  where  he  was  still  at  home. 

A  fanfare  of  trumpets  rang  out  above  the  babble 
and  the  laughter.  Fans  were  closed,  flirtations 
broken  off.  Luz  turned  in  her  seat;  all  eyes  were 
fixed  on  the  corner  where  the  Calle  de  Serpientes 
turns  into  the  plaza.  Down  the  narrow  street, 
out  into  the  full  light  of  the  square,  rode  a  troop  of 
resplendent  cavalry, —  white  Andalusian  horses 
with  delicate,  high-stepping  feet,  men  who  sat 
straight  in  the  saddle,  in  spite  of  rich  trappings 
and  gorgeous  uniforms.  The  penitentes  followed, 
sombre,  masked  men  in  long,  purple  velvet  gowns, 
the  train  folded  over  the  arm,  showing  violet  silk 
stockings  and  silver-buckled  shoes.  From  their 
tall,  pointed  caps  hung  down  the  antefaces  covering 
the  entire  head,  falling  low  upon  the  breast: 
through  the  eyeholes  one  caught  the  flash  of  dark 
eyes.  In  their  gloved  hands  they  carried  silver 
staffs  of  office  ten  feet  high.  Behind  walked  the 
Nazerenos.  The  foremost  carried  a  large  cross; 
the  others,  standards  of  the  order,  or  flaming 
torches  that  smoked  and  flickered  as  they  walked. 
Before  the  penitentes  passed  in  front  of  the  grand 
stand,  they  spread  out  their  trains  that  trailed 
behind  them  on  the  ground.  In  the  midst  of  these 
maskers  strode  a  band  of  Roman  centurions, — 
helmets,  cuirasses,  spears,  and  standards  with  the 
familiar  S  P  Q  R  glancing  in  the  sun.  The 
music  to  which  they  marched  had  a  melancholy 
refrain,  a  sort  of  insistant  grieving  that  knocked 
at  the  heart. 

"  The  funeral  march  of  Eslava;  you  will  know 
it  well  before  Easter,"  said  Pemberton. 

"  Ai,  ail "  A  great  sigh  breathed  by  a  thousand 
people  as  the  first  paso  came  in  sight, —  a  huge 
float  moving,  as  if  miraculously,  down  the  Street 
of  Serpents  out  into  the  plaza.  On  a  base  of 
wrought  silver,  at  the  height  of  a  man's  shoulder, 
stood  a  life-sized  statue  of  the  Virgin. 

"  Nuestra  Senora  de  la  Vittoria"  murmured 
Concepcion. 

The  statue,  of  painted  wood,  was  sumptuously 
dressed.  The  front  of  her  robe  was  of  costly  lace; 
over  this  fell  from  the  shoulders  a  train  of  black 
velvet,  two  yards  long,  heavily  embroidered  in 
gold  arabesques.  The  hair  was  real.  On  the 
head  sparkled  a  stupendous  diamond  crown. 
Slowly,  slowly  the  float  drew  near,  wrapped 
in  a  cloud  of  incense  from  the  censers  of  the 
penitentes.  A  rain  of  flowers  fell  from  window  and 
balcony;  the  velvet  and  gold  baldequin  over  the 
Virgin's  head  was  almost  hidden  by  lilies  and 
roses.  At  her  feet  were  flaunting  daffodils  in 
silver  vases,  and  row  on  row  of  blazing  candles 
at  various  heights.  She  was  covered  from  throat 
to  waist  with  superb  jewels,  strings  of  pearls, 
diamonds,  and  sapphires.  Her  wrists  were  laden 
with  bracelets,  in  her  hand  she  carried  a  lace 
pocket  handkerchief.  As  she  entered  the  plaza 
a  tremendous  peal  shook  the  soft  air;  the  vast 
green  bells  of  the  Giralda  seemed  to  fling  them- 
selves like  live  creatures  towards  Mary.  The 
glitter  of  the  gewgaws,  the  glow  of  the  candles 
lighted  up  the  face,  showed  the  tears  (pearls  of 
great  price)  on  the  cheeks,  the  beauty  and  tender- 
ness of  the  expression. 

"  A  masterpiece  by  the  sculptor,  Montanes,  the 
friend  of  Velasquez,"  said  Pemberton.  In  spite 
of  all  the  frippery  of  the  dress  you  feel  the  hand  of 
the  master  sculptor  in  the  painted  statue.  The 
loving,  tender  face,  the  feminine  outstretched 
arms  divinely  express  the  eternal  womanly. 

"  Mire,  Mire,  Vd!  el  Rey  y  la  Reina!  "  whispered 
Concepcion.  She  had  not  been  too  much  engrossed 
to  see  the  young  King  and  his  mother  take  their 
places.  The  paso  turned  slowly  as  if  on  a  pivot 
till  the  queen  celestial  faced  the  queen  terrestrial. 
The  King  uncovered  and  saluted,  the  Queen 
Mother,  Cristina  Maria,  courtesied, —  so  they 
stood  facing  each  other  for  a  single  heart-beat, 
then  the  King  left  the  dais,  walked  down  into  the 
plaza,  and  took  his  place  at  the  head  of  those 
masked  men. 

"  Don  Alfonzo  is  the  Elder  Brother  of  the 
Confraternity  of  the  Cigar  Makers,"  whispered 
Concepcion.  "  See,  he  escorts  their  patron,  our 
Lady  of  Victory,  through  the  plaza." 

To  the  mournful  grieving  of  Eslava's  dirge,  the 
Virgin  of  the  cigar  makers,  escorted  by  the  King, 
disappeared  on  the  way  to  her  station  in  the 
cathedral. 

"  Te  dea  major  eris! '"  murmured  Pemberton, 
"  so  they  carried  Salambo  through  Seville.  I 
hope  you  admired  the  dress;  it  was  new  this  year, 
a  present  from  the  ladies  of  Seville.  It  cost  one 
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  pesetas;  I  know 
because  I  helped  pay  for  it.  You  saw  there  were 
bread  riots  last  week,  not  fifty  miles  from  here  ? 

It's  the  old  spirit  of  Seville,  the  spirit  that  built 
the  cathedral  during  the  hundred  years  when 
Spain  was  pouring  out  blood  and  money  like 
water  in  defence  of  the  faith.  We  can  always  get 
what  we  really  want  in  Seville,  and  most  other 
places!  " 

During  the  long  waits  between  the  acts  of  the 
drama  of  the  Passion,  the  little  dramas  of  every- 
day life  went  on  all  around  us.  In  the  boxes  the 
young  people  looked  into  each  other's  eyes,  the 
duennas  manoeuvred,  encouraged  the  eligible, 
frowned  on  the  ineligible.  A  slim  young  officer 
in  a  cloak  slipped  a  note  into  Luz's  hand  as  he 
passed  her  box,  and  only  the  Franciscan  saw  it. 
In  the  crowd  below,  the  flirt  of  an  orange  skirt 
challenged  beauty  in  the  grand  stand. 

"  Imperio,  the  dancing  girl,"  said  Pemberton. 
"  She's  come  home  for  the  fetes.  That  old  fellow, 
her  father,  is  the  crack  matador  tailor;  he  makes 
all  Bombito's  toggery." 

"  Mire"  whispered  Concepcion,  *  The  Lord 
dressed  in  a  handsome  tunic  of  cloth  of  silver, 
embroidered  in  gold." 

The  entry  into  Jerusalem,  a  realistic  float,  was 
passing.  It  represented  the  Master  mounted  on  an 
ass,  Peter,  John,  and  Sant  lago  kneeling  before 
him.  This  was  followed  by  a  large  paso,  illustrating 
the  Betrayal  in  the  Garden.  Peter,  sword  in 
hand,  Judas  —  he  was  always  dressed  in  yellow, 
the  color  of  treachery  —  the  Roman  soldiers  as 
well  as  the  Christ,  are  all  the  work  of  Montanes. 
It  is  said  that  Montanes  while  he  was  at  work  on 
this,  often  got  up  at  night  to  look  at  it,  and  was 
once  overheard  to  say,  "  How  could  I  have  done 
anything  so  beautiful  ?  "  In  spite  of  the  Master's 
ruby  velvet  robe  and  the  tawdry  gilt  rays  behind 
his  head,  the  thing  took  hold  of  one,  the  picture 
"  bit  "  into  the  memory  plate  and  will  not  easily 
be  erased.  There  was  a  moment  of  silence  as 
the  scenes  of  the  Passion  were  presented  in  these 
wonderful  vivid  pictures,  but  as  soon  as  each 
paso  swung  by  the  grand  stand,  the  laughter 
and  flirtation  began  again.  The  tragic  paso  of 
the  Crucifixion  was  escorted  by  a  brotherhood  of 
boy  penitentes  followed  by  a  band  of  child  musi- 
cians. Directly  behind  the  cross  marched  a  tiny 
drummer  in  uniform,  beating  a  big  drum.  If  he 
was  mot  a  dwarf,  he  could  not  have  been  more  than 
four  years  old. 

*  What  a  funny  little  boy! "  murmured  Concep- 
cion,  wiping  the  tears  of  laughter  from  her  eyes. 
The  supreme  scene  of  the  Crucifixion,  the  figures 
all  by  Roldan,  the  sculptor  who  spares  no  grim 
detail  of  pain,  was  followed  by  stifled  laughter. 
The  merriment  struck  an  awful  anti-climax. 

"  Remember,"  Pemberton  explained,  "  you  are 
seeing  this  thing  for  the  first  time;  these  people  have 
seen  it  all  their  lives;  familiarity  breeds,  not  con- 
tempt, but  a  certain  callousness.  The  young 
women  are  so  strictly  guarded,  you  must  not 
blame  them  if  they  '  make  eyes '  a  little.  This  is 
one  of  their  few  chances  to  see  and  be  seen." 

:<  Do  you  make  as  much  of  Christmas  as  of 
Holy  Week  ?  "  I  asked  Concepcion,  to  turn  the 
conversation.  *  Which  is  the  greater  fiesta?  " 

"  There  are  three  great  fiestas  of  the  Church," 
she  answered,  "  but  Christmas  is,  undoubtedly, 
the  greatest.  There  is  a  saying,  *  Who  does  not 
fast  on  the  vigil  of  Christmas  is  either  a  Turk  or  a 
dog.'  This  is  true  for  people  of  our  religion,  for 
at  midnight  the  Nino  Jesus  was  born.  I  do  not 
know  how  it  is  with  you,  for  we  are  Catholics  and 
you  are  Christians." 

"  In  what  does  the  difference  lie  ?  " 

"  In  the  manner  of  baptism.  You  are  baptized 
all  over  in  a  great  vat  with  water  only;  we,*with 
water,  oil,  and  salt  that  is  put  in  the  mouth.  There 
are  also  other  ceremonies, —  there  is  the  godmother 
who  holds  the  candle." 

"  What  are  the  Christmas  services  like  ?  " 

"  Ah,  you  must 'return,  if  only  to  see  the  dancing 
of  the  seises  in  the  cathedral.  I  am  told  this  can 
be  seen  only  at  Seville.  The  seises  are  boys, 
who  wear  curious  dresses  and  long  blond  curls. 
It  is  an  ancient  custom, —  my  husband  says,  in 
memory  of  the  Israelites  dancing  before  the  ark, 
but  I  think  differently." 

"  At  one  time  there  was  an  effort  to  break  up 
the  dance  of  the  seises"  Pemberton  interrupted. 
"  Some  busybody  complained  to  the  Pope  that  it 
was  a  heathenish  thing.  The  result  of  the  med- 
dling was  a  papal  bull  ordering  that  the  dancing 
should  stop  when  the  dresses  were  worn  out.  That 
was  long  and  long  ago;  the  dresses  have  not  worn  out 
yet.  They  are  renewed  a  piece  at  a  time,  one 
year  a  sleeve,  another  year  a  cap,  so  the  day  has 
never  come  when  they  are  completely  outworn. 
Our  seises  still  dance  at  Christmas,  Corpus 
Christi,  and  the  feast  of  the  Conception  —  that's 
my  wife's  fiesta,  you  know." 

"  The  Christmas  ceremonies  in  the  villages  are 
also  interesting,"  said  Concepcion.  "  I  once  saw 
a  procession  when  the  Nino  Jesus  was  carried 
through  the  streets.  It  was  a  very  large  image, 
the  size  of  a  big  baby.  It  had  a  beautiful  head, 
and  was  nicely  swaddled.  One  Christmas  as  they 
were  carrying  him  on  his  procession  (this  was 
years  and  years  ago),  there  was  a  quarrel  in  the 
crowd  and  one  man  stabbed  another.  The  Nino 
Jesus  grew  pale  and  turned  his  head  on  one  side, 
so  that  he  might  not  see  that  dreadful  sight.  He 
has  remained  in  that  attitude  ever  since.  I  myself 
have  seen  the  Nino.  Yes,  it  was  a  wonderful 
happening.  It  is  a  much  venerated  image  and  has 
always  remained  in  the  care  of  the  good  Franciscan 
monks." 

Concepcion  saw  that  I  was  interested,  that  Pem- 
berton  was  busy  explaining  things  to  the  others,  and, 
out  of  the  immense  goodness  of  her  heart,  she  went 
on  to  speak  to  me  of  religious  matters. 

"  I  have  always  heard  it  said,"  she  began,  "  that 
there  are  seven  religions." 

"  I,  too,  have  heard  it,  indeed,  my  pastor  has 
written  a  book  on  the  subject;*  can  you  tell  me 
their  names  ?  " 

"  Not  all  of  them.  There  are  Catholics,  Chris- 
tians, and  those  who  worship  Mahomet.  There 
are  the  Israelites, —  they  have  the  strangest  religion! 
They  worship  a  calf's  head.  In  their  church  they 
put  on  the  queerest  garments,  gather  round  a  great 
calf's  head  in  the  middle,  and  sing  such  a  curious 
hymn,  *  Wow,  Wow ! '  It  sounds  like  that.  It 
would  make  you  laugh,  only  they  will  not  let  you 
into  the  synagogue,  and  if  you  do  just  manage  to 
peep  in,  they  drive  you  out." 

I  told  her  of  the  wailing  of  the  Jews  outside  the 
wall  of  Jerusalem,  hoping  to  rouse  some  sympathy 
for  them,  but  Concepcion  could  feel  none. 

"  Though,"  she  acknowledged,  "  our  Lord  was 

*James  Freeman  Clarke's  "  Seven  Great  Religions." 
an  Israelite.  He  did  not  become  a  Catholic  till 
he  was  thirty-three  years  old,  when  He  had  Him- 
self baptized  by  San  Juan  Battisto.  Before  that 
He  occupied  Himself  with  preaching  His  religion." 

I  asked  Concepcion  which  of  the  saints  was  her 
especial  patron. 

*  The  blessed  saints  are  all  very  good,"  she 
answered,  "  but  I  myself  do  not  put  much  de- 
pendence on  them.  I  place  all  my  hopes  on  the 
Virgin." 

As  Concepcion  talked,  the  sun  went  down;  long 
shadows  fell  across  the  plaza.  The  pale  rose- 
colored  Giralda  glowed  a  deeper  pink  in  the  sunset, 
and  then  faded.  The  new  moon  came  up  in  the 
faint  lavender  sky  and  hung,  a  golden  scimitar, 
the  evening  star  beside  it,  over  the  tower.  In  the 
minaret  where  the  muezzin  once  cried  his  shrill 
"  Allah  il  Allah"  San  Miquel  and  el  Cantor, 
rocked  and  pealed,  saluting  each  float  as  it  passed. 

"  See,  the  crescent  and  the  star  over  the 
Giralda,"  said  Pemberton;  "  the  cross  gleams 
red  on  the  cathedral.  Mary  reigns  in  Mahomet's 
place,  and  her  robe  is  worked  in  the  arabesques 
of  the  Moors." 

Walking  home,  we  came  upon  a  paso  at  rest  in  a 
side  street.  The  velvet  hangings  that  fall  from  the 
base  to  the  ground  were  parted.  We  caught  a 
glimpse  of  the  hidden  motive  power,  twenty-five 
or  thirty  men,  with  quaint,  padded  turbans  on 
their  heads,  the  ends  hanging  down  and  covering 
the  shoulder.  The  water  seller  in  his  white  gar- 
ments was  in  attendance.  He  filled  and  refilled 
his  glass,  passing  it  to  the  thirsty  bearers,  who 
drank,  and  mopped  their  faces  silently.  The 
masked  penitentes  stood  at  ease,  fanning  them- 
selves, the  Nazerenos  trimmed  their  torches. 

'  Vamos!  '''  The  leader  struck  the  ground  with 
his  silver  staff;  the  velvet  hangings  fell  in  place 
(the  embossed  pattern  was  so  contrived  that  the 
air  holes  were  invisible),  and  the  heavy  paso 
moved  steadily  down  the  calle  on  the  heads  and 
shoulders  of  those  hidden  men. 

In  the  processions  of  Holy  Thursday  and  Good 
Friday  afternoons,  the  mysteries  of  the  Passion 
were  represented  again  and  again  with  endless 
variations.  The  pasos  seemed  to  grow  more 
splendid,  the  dresses  and  accessories  more  lavish. 
The  brotherhoods,  called  hermandads  or  cofradias, 
have  charge  of  the  floats,  called  pasos  or  andas, 
the  statues,  and  all  the  paraphernalia  of  the 
pageants.  There  is  a  certain  rivalry  between 
them;  some  excel  in  one  particular,  some  in 
another.  One  of  the  treasures  I  remember  was 
a  huge  and  very  beautiful  crucifix  of  tortoise  shell 
and  silver.  The  dresses  of  penitentes  and  Naze- 
renos were  never  alike;  some  were  in  white  with  blue 
masks,  some  in  black  and  silver.  They  all  followed 
the  same  plan,  the  head  and  face  were  so  disguised 
that  it  was  impossible  to  recognize  the  man  in  the 
penitent's  dress.  The  Hermandad  of  Nuestro 
Padre  Jesus  de  la  Passion,  founded  in  the  sixteenth 
century,  is  the  oldest  brotherhood.  In  its  early 
days  the  Hermanos  de  Sangue  scourged  themselves 
as  they  walked  barefoot  through  the  streets. 
Those  who  carried  the  torches  were  distinguished 
from  the  flagellants  by  the  title  Hermanos  de  Luz. 
"  Brothers  of  light,"  Pemberton  translated  it. 
"  Who  would  not  be  glad  to  deserve  such  a  title  ? 
To  be  a  true  '  Brother  of  light! '  " 

Tres  jueves  hay  en  el  ano  Three  Thursdays  in  the year 

que  relumbran  mas  que  el  Shine  brighter  than  the 
sol;  sun; 
Corpus  Christi,  Jueves  Corpus     Christi,     Holy 
Santo,  Thursday, 
y  el  dia  de  la  Ascen-  And  the  day  of  theAscion.  cension. 
"TTARK,  Pan  pipes!"  said  J.,  "don't  you 
JL1  hear  that  lovely  thin  music  of  the  shep- 
herd's flute?" 
"  Here  in  Seville  ?     Is  it  possible  ?  " 

*  Why  not  ?  All  things  are  possible  when  you 
are  living  half  in  the  tenth  century,  half  in  the 
twentieth!" 

The  sylvan  melody,  shrilling  louder,  pierced  the 
city's  drone.  At  our  gate  the  piper*paused  and 
played  his  little  tune  again.  He  was  a  tall  young 
man  with  a  bold  eye  and  a  gay  lilt  of  the  head. 


Chapter IV. THE  BLACK  VEIL 

His  blue  apron  was  tucked  under  his  jacket,  he 
wore  a  red  rose  behind  his  ear.  There  was  some- 
thing free  and  debonair  about  him  that  spoke  the 
youth  of  the  world;  his  music  stirred  the  blood. 
I  could  have  followed  him  and  his  pipe  through  the 
streets  without  a  thought  of  the  business  of  the  day. 

"  A  wandering  knife  grinder  from  La  Mancha," 
said  J.,  pulling  out  his  sketchbook.  "  Find  some 
scissors  or  something  for  him  to  sharpen.  Can't 
you  keep  him  busy  a  moment,  while  I  try  to  draw 
him?" 

He  would  not  stay;  you  cannot  deceive  a  Man- 
chegan.  He  saw  at  a  glance  there  was  "  nothing 
doing  "  for  him  in  our  patio;  sounded  his  flute  and 
went  lightly  on  his  way,  his  wheel  at  his  back. 
If  knives  were  to  grind,  he  was  ready  to  grind  them 
even  on  &  fiesta  grande  like  Holy  Thursday. 

Before  his  music  was  out  of  earshot,  Concepcion 
appeared  at  the  gate,  a  pink  japonica  in  her  hair, 
her  fan  the  same  color,  a  shade  darker.  Behind 
her,  like  a  tall,  thin  shadow,  came  Pemberton. 

"  Another  fan  ?  Do  you  never  carry  the  same 
twice?" 

"  Oh,  yes,  she  has  to,  poor  child,"  said  Pember- 
ton. "She  possesses  only  fifty-five  fans;  Luz,  I 
hear,  owns  three  hundred  and  fifty.  You're 
feeling  fit,  I  hope  ?  We  have  a  long  day  before  us. 
We  go  first  to  San  Lorenzo  to  see  the  monument,-^
sepulchre  you  call  it  in  Italy.  Concepcion  says 
we  shall  be  in  time  to  see  the  arrival  of  the  royal 
party.  They  must  go  on  foot  like  the  rest  of  us 
to-day ;  not  a  bell  may  ring,  not  a  wheel  turn  in  all 
Seville,  this  week,  from  Wednesday  night  till 
Saturday  noon." 

Only  the  wheel  of  the  Brother  of  Light,  the  wan- 
dering knife  grinder  of  La  Mancha ! 

The  Plaza  San  Lorenzo  was  filled  with  people, 
the  trees  with  small  boys;  a  mannerly  crowd  with 
no  hoodlums;  indeed,  I  think  the  genus  does  not 
exist  in  Spain.  Soon  the  word  was  passed:  "  They 
are  coming."  The  throng  shifted,  a  way  was 
made  for  the  king's  halberdiers,  fierce  men  with 
twisted  moustachios  and  bronzed  skins,  the  very 
flower  of  the  army.  Their  duty  is  to  guard,  day 
and  night,  the  person  of  the  King.  The  civil 
governor,  Lopez  Balesteros,  followed  with  his 
aides,  and  the  Alcalde  of  Seville,  a  bulky,  puffing 
man.  His  gown  and  his  fat  made  it  hard  for  him 
to  keep  the  pace  of  those  tough,  quick-marching 
swashbucklers.  Last,  surrounded  by  his  major 
domos  of  the  week  and  his  gentlemen  of  the  cham- 
ber, the  King,  long  of  leg,  slender  of  body,  with  the 
heavy,  underhung  jaw,  the  slovenly  nether  lip  of  the 
Hapsburgs,  a  boyish  dignity,  and  a  frank  smile  all 
his  own.  He  wore  a  smart  uniform  with  a  white 
plumed  helmet. 

"  Don  Alfonzo  has  as  many  incarnations  as 
Jupiter,"  said  Pemberton.  '  To-day  he  is  a 
major  general  of  cavalry.  Notice  that  gold  chain 
and  tell  me,  if  you  can,  what  it  is." 

The  chain,  wide  and  flat,  with  elaborately 
wrought  links,  was  flung  over  the  King's  shoulders. 
From  it  hung  a  little  gold  animal  uncomfortably  tied 
by  the  middle;  its  head  and  legs  all  flopping  down 
in  a  dreadful  way,  like  a  horse  being  hoisted  on 
board  ship. 

"  By  the  great  horn  spoon!  "  cried  Patsy;  "  it's 
the  grand  order  of  the  Golden  Fleece!  I  would 
rather  own  that  than  be  King  of  Spain." 

The  golden  toy  hung  on  the  young  King's 
breast  just  as  it  hangs  in  Alonzo  Coello's  portrait 
of  Philip  II.  Beside  the  King  walked  his  mother  — 
she  looks  a  bigot  worthy  of  Philip's  house  —  and  his 
sister,  the  Infanta  Maria  Teresa,  enough  like  him, 
in  spite  of  her  white  mantilla,  to  be  his  twin. 

Sanchez  Lozano,  Elder  Brother  of  the  Parish 
Confraternity,  Jose  Ponce,  the  archpriest,  and  half 
a  dozen  other  bigwigs  met  the  royalties  at  the  door 
of  San  Lorenzo.  The  bigwigs  made  oration, 
long  and  loud,  the  King  took  off  his  helmet  and 
mopped  his  crimson  face.  It  was  a  cruelly  hot 
day  for  the  season. 

"  They  work  the  boy  hard,"  said  Pemberton. 
"  He  was  at  the  cathedral  at  half  past  nine,  this 
morning,  and  led  the  procession  to  deposit  the 
Host  in  the  monument.  Next  he  went  to  the 
church  of  San  Salvador;  this  is  his  third  sepulchre. 
They  have  walked  him  all  over  the  place;  warm 
work  in  that  thick  uniform.  If  every  Spaniard 
earned  his  salt  as  honestly  as  Don  Alfonzo,  Spain 
would  not  be  where  she  is  to-day." 

Pemberton  heard  afterwards,  from  one  of  the 
Brothers,  what  passed  in  the  church  while  we 
waited  in  the  plaza.  The  King,  after  praying  by 
the  sepulchre,  a  flower-decked,  candle-lighted 
space  before  the  altar,  and  admiring  the  pasos  of 
the  Virgin  of  Solitude  and  the  Christ  of  Great 
Power,  talked  with  the  elder  Brother,  asked  if  he 
too,  walked  masked  in  the  procession  of  penitence. 
Sanchez  Lozano  said  that  he  did,  and  reminded 
Don  Alfonzo  that  Isabel  II,  the  King's  grand- 
mother, and  Ferdinand  VII,  his  great  grand- 
father, had  been  members  of  this  Brotherhood. 
The  King  and  the  Infanta,  without  more  ado, 
took  the  oath  and  signed  the  articles  of  the 
Brotherhood. 

"  Of  course  it  had  all  been  cut,  dried,  and 
smoked  beforehand,"  Pemberton  added.  *  Royalty 
does  not  often  have  an  opportunity  to  enjoy  the 
unforeseen!  " 

When  they  came  out  of  church,  the  King  had 
faded  to  a  healthy  pink;  we  no  longer  feared 
apoplexy  for  him.  The  gorgeous,  sweating  com- 
pany crossed  the  plaza,  the  crowd  cheered,  the 
ladies  in  the  balconies  clapped  hands  and  waved 
'kerchiefs. 

"  Come,"  said  Pemberton,  "  to  see  beauty, 
follow  in  a  monarch's  wake.  We  shall  find  the 
handsomest  women  of  Seville  inside  the  church." 

A  dozen  ladies,  their  flushed,  excited  faces  re- 
flecting the  royal  smile,  clustered  about  the  sad 
Virgin.  A  senorita,  in  black  gauze  with  pink 
camelias  in  her  hair  and  bodice,  tapped  a  silver 
money  tray  with  a  copper  coin : 

"  Did  they  desire  to  purchase  a  photograph  of  our 
Lady  ?  "  She  spoke  to  me,  she  looked  at  Patsy. 

A  nun  in  a  coarse  habit  passed;  the  rough  woolen 
of  her  gown  caught  in  the  hem  of  the  young  lady's 
silk  dress,  and  showed  a  pair  of  little  feet  in  flesh- 
colored  silk  stockings  and  satin  shoes. 

"  At  the  feet  of  the  young  lady,"  said  Patsy, 
"  I  desire  greatly  to  purchase  a  photograph. 
Will  she  do  me  the  divine  favor  of  choosing  ?  " 

"  I  kiss  the  hand  of  the  horseman.  It  appears 
this  large  one  is  the  most  good;  it  is,  as  well,  the 
more  dear." 

The  slight  lisp,  the  smell  of  jasmines,  the  turn  of 
wrist,  as  the  pink  fan  opened  and  shut,  were  all 
familiar.  Where  —  when  —  had  we  seen  her  ? 
Patsy  knew :  it  was  Luz  of  the  agate  eyes! 
I  forget  what  day  it  was  that  Pemberton  and  I 
stayed  at  the  cathedral  after  mass  to  hear  the 
Archbishop's  sermon,  but  this  seems  a  good  time 
to  tell  about  it.  The  Archbishop  was  a  refined, 
silvery  old  ascetic,  who  looked  like  Cardinal 
Newman.  He  preached  as  the  students  of  the 
Theatre  Fran9ais  talk,  as  if  speech  were  first  a 
fine  art,  second  an  expression  of  thought.  Pausing 
now  and  then  from  exhaustion,  he  poured  out  an 
eloquent  appeal  to  love  the  Mother  of  God.  After 
service  the  Archbishop  was  escorted  to  the  epis- 
copal palace  near  the  cathedral,  by  a  sacristan, 
carrying  a  silver  mace,  another  with  a  tall,  double 
cross,  and  six  haughty  young  priests  in  new  purple 
silk  gowns. 

"  Do  you  notice,"  asked  Pemberton,  *''  the 
difference  between  the  Italian  and  the  Spanish 
priests  ?  The  Italian  looks  at  you  sidelong,  when 
you  are  not  looking;  sizes  up  your  feeling  about  him 
and  his  church.  Your  Spaniard  is  a  bird  of  a 
different  feather;  he  doesn't  give  a  maravedi  what 
you  think  of  him.  You  are  on  trial,  not  he.  The 
only  question  is,  are  you  what  you  should  be? 
That  he  is,  there  can  be  no  perad venture." 

We  joined  the  crowd  of  women  and  beggars 
following  the  Archbishop  in  his  fine  violet  robe, 
scarlet  moire  skull-cap,  and  amethyst  cross.  A 
wild-eyed  woman  with  a  bruised  face  threw  herself 
at  his  feet,  holding  up  a  despairing  hand  as  if  in 
appeal.  Tired  and  feeble,  the  old  man  paused 
patiently,  and  said  some  words  of  fatherly  comfort. 
She  kissed  the  great  sapphire  on  his  transparent 
old  hand  and  drew  back  weeping,  as  if  ashamed. 

"  The  heart  of  man  changeth  not,"  said  Pem- 
berton.  "  In  the  days  of  the  Inquisition  there 
were  priests  tender-hearted  as  the  Archbishop.  He 
could  not  send  a  cat  to  torture  or  the  stake.  That 
big  priest,  with  the  brutal  jaw,  the  one  who  limps, 
looks  cruel  as  Torquemada;  he  would  condemn  a 
man  to  la  Parra  (the  dungeon  in  the  Bishop's  Pal- 
ace over  there)  as  quick  as  winking  —  if  he  could !  " 

The  shadow  on  the  sun-dial  over  the  palace  door 
pointed  to  twelve.  We  followed  the  women  into 
the  handsome  courtyard,  hung  with  blue  and  striped 
hangings,  and  watched  the  Archbishop  totter 
feebly  up  the  fine  marble  stair.  At  the  door  he 
turned  and  gave  the  episcopal  blessing,  two 
fingers  raised,  and  went  indoors  with  his  escort. 
He  was  followed  by  people  bearing  gifts  of  fruit 
and  cakes.  Four  strong  men  carried  up  a  large 
tray  of  yellow  frosted  pyramids  stuck  all  over  with 
candied  cherries. 

"  Red  and  yellow,  the  Spanish  colors,"  said 
Pemberton.  "  I  hope  Torquemada  and  the  others 
stay  to  luncheon  and  eat  up  those  pyramids;  they 
would  not  be  good  for  the  Archbishop." 
On  Holy  Thursday  afternoon,  the  ceremony 
of  the  Washing  of  Feet  was  celebrated  in  the 
cathedral.  The  King,  it  was  said,  would  take  the 
first  role;  the  Archbishop,  however,  officiated  in 
his  place.  On  a  platform  before  the  high  altar 
stood  the  benches  for  the  apostles.  The  twelve 
poor  old  men  who  impersonated  them  came  tod- 
dling in,  each  carrying  a  clean,  fringed  towel  over 
his  shoulder.  They  took  the  shoe  and  stocking 
from  the  right  foot.  One  old  fellow,  Concepcion's 
friend,  the  beggar  at  the  cathedral  door,  was  so 
infirm  that  he  could  scarcely  untie  his  shoe.  He 
persisted  bravely,  though,  and  to  him  Torquemada, 
who  assisted  the  Archbishop,  first  presented  the 
silver  basin.  The  pauper  placed  his  foot  in  it, 
Torquemada  poured  water  from  a'  silver  flagon; 
the  old  Archbishop,  kneeling,  kissed  the  beggar's 
foot. 

"  Isn't  it  a  pleasant  ceremony  ?  "  said  Pember- 
ton.  "  Poor  old  chaps,  no  wonder  they  look  so 
proud.  To-day  they  have  dined  with  the  Arch- 
bishop in  his  palace,  and  those  fine  new  clothes 
are  their  very  own  for  keeps." 

The  service  was  followed  by  the  singing  of  the 
tenebrae.  It  was  growing  dark  in  the  cathedral; 
ail  the  light  and  color  were  concentrated  in  the 
coro,  glowing  like  a  live  jewel  in  the  centre  of  the 
shadowy  church.  An  aged  crone,  a  battered 
derelict  on  life's  stream,  drifted  by,  touching  here 
and  there  at  altar  and  at  shrine,  as  at  so  many 
friendly  ports.  She  came  to  anchor  before  our 
Lady  of  Good  Counsel,  and  took  out  her  rosary. 
At  every  pater  nosier  she  kissed  her  beads.  Those 
pathetic,  mumbling  old  lips  must  have  had  sore 
need  of  something  to  kiss.  She  pressed  them  over 
and  over  again  on  the  cold  glass  that  covered  a  little 
chromo  of  Our  Lady  of  Good  Counsel,  set  con- 
veniently low  in  the  wall,  for  the  kisses  of  the  for- 
lorn old  lips  that  missed  perhaps  the  warm  cheeks 
of  child  or  grandchild.  Outside  the  coro,  below 
the  black  veil  that  hung  before  the  altar,  stood  the 
vast  bronze  tenebrium,  with  its  fifteen  great 
candles.  An  acolyte  with  a  long  torch  kindled 
the  candles,  a^d  the  first  lamentation  rang  through 
the  cathedral.  One  by  one,  as  each  pitiful  lament 
commemorating  the  suffering  and  death  of  Christ 
trailed  into  silence,  a  candle  was  extinguished,  till 
the  fourteen  symbolical  of  the  apostles  were  all 
put  out.  It  grew  darker  and  darker;  at  last  only 
the  taper  at  the  top  remained  alight  in  memory  of 
Christ,  the  unquenchable  light  of  the  world. 

Later  that  evening  we  returned  to  the  cathedral 
for  the  miserere.  The  Calle  de  Sierpes  was  filled 
with  a  holiday  crowd.  In  the  balconies  outside 
the  cafes,  at  the  street  corners,  were  groups  of 
young  and  old,  little  children,  graybeards,  and 
grandams;  during  Holy  Week  it  seemed  that  no- 
body in  Seville  went  to  bed. 

"  El  Liberal!  "  A  newsboy  offered  the  sheet, 
wet  from  the  press. 

"  Agua.  aguafresca!  "  The  grave  water  seller 
followed  close  on  his  heels. 

"  Dos  por  uno  perro  chico"  cried  a  correct  old 
man,  with  beautifully  curled  silver  hair  and  beard, 
selling  shoe  laces.  A  woman  who  looked  like  a 
caryatid,  with  a  basket  of  royal  purple  flags  on 
her  head,  bought  a  pair  of  laces.  A  young  girl 
with  a  dimple,  carrying  her  boots  in  one  hand  and 
two  large  dried  codfish  in  the  other,  accidentally 
jostled  me.  The  caryatid,  evidently  her  mother, 
cried,  "Cuidada!"  rather  sharply. 

"Dispense  V '.,"  said  the  dimple,  ^blushing  and 
distressed  at  the  mischance. 

"  Manos  blancas  no  ofendan "  (white  hands 
never  hurt),  said  Pemberton. 

"  What  good  manners  these  people  have! " 
I  said,  as  we  passed  on,  leaving  the  girl  still  under 
the  shadow  of  the  caryatid's  displeasure. 

"  The  finest  manners  in  the  world,"  Pemberton 
agreed. 

In  the  cathedral  flickering  torches  shone  on 
a  vast  congregation  met  to  hear  Eslava's  mis- 
erere: matadors,  gypsies,  nuns,  babies,  beggars, 
beauties  of  court  and  theatre.  Every  girl  in  a 
mantilla  looked  a  heroine,  every  lad  with  a  straight 
back,  a  hero,  in  that  witchery  of  light  and  shadow. 
From  our  places  neither  orchestra  nor  musicians 
were  in  sight,  only  solemn  columns,  long  aisles, 
and  twinkling  lamps  before  pictured  Nativity  and 
Pieta.  Two  votive  candles  were  burning  before 
Santa  Teresa,  showing  the  wax  ex-votos  of  little 
hands,  legs,  and  feet,  hanging  from  long  braids 
of  hair  around  the  shrine.  Near  the  puerta 
mayor  a  blaze  of  glory  shone  from  the  white  and 
gold  monument  over  the  tomb  of  Ferdinand 
Columbus,  where  the  Host  had  been  that  morning 
deposited  to  remain  till  the  first  mass  on  Saturday 
morning,  surrounded  by  kneeling  monks. 

"  I  fancy,'*  said  Pemberton,  "  that  here,  in  the 
cathedral  where  he  was  chapel  master,  Eslava 
planned  his  miserere,  —  caught,  while  he  sat 
dreaming  at  the  organ,  the  divine  harmonies  it 
repeats." 

The  twin  organs  called  and  answered  each  other, 
the  deep  notes  thrilled  and  thundered  through  the 
aisles.  The  clear  boy  voices  scaled  the  heights  of 
song;  the  mellow  altos  held  the  middle  ground, 
the  deep  basses  welded  voices,  organs,  instruments, 
into  a  full  glorious  harmony  that  swept  the  soul. 
The  miserere  over,  one  by  one  the  great  pasos  of 
the  afternoon's  procession,  taking  on  a  new  and 
awful  beauty  in  the  dim  cathedral,  swung  slowly 
down  the  aisle,  halting  at  the  monument  on  the 
way  to  their  several  stations. 

"  This  seems  to  link  Columbus  with  \hefiestas" 
said  Pemberton,  "  and  makes  me  feel  that  I,  too, 
have  some  part  in  them, —  he  is  so  much  more  ours 
than  theirs!  " 

As  we  came  down  the  steps  of  the  cathedral,  we 
passed  the  knife  grinder  of  La  Mancha.  He  had 
taken  off  his  apron,  and  left  his  pipe  and  wheel  at 
home.  As  he  strolled  along  under  the  burning 
stars,  he  hummed  a  snatch  of  the  music  we  had 
just  heard,  and  hummed  it  correctly. 

"  Rich  and  poor,  vagrant  and  King,  there  is 
room  for  us  all  in  the  Heart  of  Seville,"  sighed 
Pemberton. 
Good  Friday 
That  night  the  King  slept  in  the  old  palace  of  the 
Alcazar.  Did  he  sleep?  In  the  gardens  the 
nightingales  were  singing  to  split  their  throats; 
palms  and  orange  trees  rustled,  fountains  whispered 
of  things  that  might  well  keep  a  lover  awake.  Here 
in  the  old  palace  of  the  Moorish  kings  lived  the 
beautiful  Maria  del  Padilla,  beloved  of  Pedro  the 
Cruel.  Here  died  the  royal  Moor,  Abu  Said, 
murdered  by  his  host,  Don  Pedro,  for  his  jewels. 
The  rarest,  the  great  spinel  ruby,  Pedro  gave  to 
Edward,  the  Black  Prince.  Henry  V  wore  it  in 
his  helmet  at  Agincourt, —  to-day  it  glows  in  the 
front  of  England's  royal  crown.  England,  always 
England!  How  often,  for  good  or  evil,  the  fates  of 
the  reigning  houses  of  Spain  and  England  have 
intertwined ! 

"  Ena,"  sang  the  nightingales;  "  Ena,"  rippled 
the  fountain, —  for  the  King  was  a  lover.  If  he 
slept  that  night  it  must  have  been  to  dream  of  the 
yellow  hair  and  the  blue  eyes  of  the  English 
princess  who,  one  happy  day,  shall  wander  with 
him  through  the  mazes,  gather  the  roses  of  that 
matchless  garden  of  the  Alcazar. 

There  was  serious  business  for  Don  Alfonzo 
that  Good  Friday  morning.  As  he  came  down 
to  the  patio  (passing  the  splendid  chamber  where 
Maria  de  Padilla  bathed,  and  where  Don  Pedro's 
courtiers  showed  their  gallantry  by  drinking  the 
water  of  her  bath),  the  drums  and  fifes  of  his 
halberdiers  sounded  the  royal  march.  Lopez 
Ballesteros,  the  Governor,  was  waiting;  with  him, 
Garcia  Pierto,  Minister  of  Grace  and  Justice. 
Preceded  by  the  halberdiers,  folio  wed  by  the  Court, 
they  all  set  off  together  for  the  cathedral.  The 
way  was  lined  by  soldiers  with  furled  flags.  In 
the  capilla  mayor  a  throne  had  been  placed  for 
the  King;  here  he  sat  with  his  grandees  and  gen- 
erals (one  of  them  called  Pacheco,  a  descendant, 
perhaps,  of  the  old  painter,  writer,  and  familiar 
of  the  Inquisition,  who  taught  Velasquez),  and 
listened  to  the  singing  of  the  Passion.  The  great 
Crucifix  of  Montanes  was  then  uncovered,  and  the 
royal  party  moved  to  the  coro,  where  the  King 
performed  the  act  of  adoration,  and  made  his 
offering  of  an  ounce  of  gold. 

At  the  act  of  adoration,  Don  Alfonzo  was  con- 
fronted by  his  Minister  of  Justice,  carrying  a 
basketful  of  parchment  scrolls,  each  tied  with  a 
black  ribbon. 

"  Senor,"  said  the  Minister,  "  do  you  pardon  the 
condemned  felons  whose  names  are  written  here  ?  " 

"  I  pardon  them,  that  God  may  pardon  me," 
answered  the  King.  One  by  one  he  untied  the 
black  ribbons  and  retied  the  scrolls  with  white 
silk  cord. 

The  wild  woman  with  the  bruised  face  the  Arch- 
bishop had  comforted  that  day  in  the  street,  had 
forced  herself  as  near  the  front  as  the  guard 
allowed.  She  peered  between  two  halberdiers, 
watching  the  ceremony  with  desperate  eyes.  Was 
the  name  she  loved  among  the  fourteen  names 
of  felons  condemned  to  death,  written  on  those 
white  decrees  of  pardon  ?  " 

"  Did  you  ever,"  asked  Pemberton,  "  see  a 
ceremony  so  touching,  so  human,  in  the  dead 
cathedrals  of  England,  or  even  in  St.  Peter's  ?  " 
We  left  by  the  Door  of  the  Lizard,  passing  under 
the  big  stuffed  crocodile  that  gives  the  name. 

"  See  that  horrid  beast!  "  said  Concepcion. 
"  A  present  from  the  Sultan  of  Turkey  to  Alonzo 
el  Savio,  whose  daughter  he  wished  to  marry. 
I  think  our  Don  Alfonzo  will  take  nicer  presents 
when  he  starts  for  England  to-morrow." 

I  asked  if  the  people  were  pleased  with  the  pro- 
posed marriage. 

K  "  Mad  about  it,"  said  Pemberton.  "  The 
Princess  Ena  will  have  a  warm  welcome;  may  she 
bring  as  good  luck  as  Elenor  Plantagenet  brought, 
when  she  came  to  marry  Alfonzo  III  of  Castille, 
Their  daughter  Berenguela  (she  was  a  rare  one), 
joined  Leon  and  Castille,  and  practically  laid  the 
foundation  of  United  Spain.  Look  for  the  woman, 
you  know,  and  you  will  find  her  at  the  bottom  of 
most  things  practical!  " 

On  the  borderland  of  sleep  that  night,  I  was 
overtaken  and  called  back  to  earth  by  the  wail  of 
Eslava's  dirge.  I  sprang  up  and  ran  to  the  bal- 
cony to  watch  the  passing  of  a  midnight  procession. 
It  was  very  late,  the  air  was  chill,  the  stars 
pale,  the  calle  deserted,  save  for  the  penitentes 
and  Nazerenos  (hidalgos  all)  in  white  gowns, 
black  antefaces,  and  scapularies.  On  the  first 
paso  stood  the  Virgin  of  Solitude,  who,  by  rule 
of  the  order,  may  only  be  absent  from  the 
church  of  San  Lorenzo  for  the  two  hours  after 
midnight  on  Good  Friday.  The  second  paso 
represented  Calvary.  The  body  of  the  Christ 
nailed  to  the  cross  shone  pale  and  ghastly  in  the 
torchlight;  the  footsteps  of  the  masked  men  sounded 
like  muffled  drums  in  the  funeral  march.  Before  the 
Christ  walked  a  female  penitent  representing  Santa 
Veronica :  her  hair  fell  over  her  shoulders  in  a  dark 
flood.  She  carried  in  extended  hands  the  hand- 
kerchief, whereon,  the  legend  says,  the  Master 
dried  his  face  on  his  way  through  the  Street  of 
of  Sorrows,  leaving  the  impress  of  His  features  on 
the  linen.  A  second  penitent  followed  the  cross, 
a  young  woman  all  in  white,  who  personified  Mary 
Magdalen,  carrying  a  box  of  ointment.  There  was 
something  familiar  about  this  Magdalen.  As  she 
passed,  a  rose  fell  from  a  balcony,  catching  in  her 
curls.  She  looked  up;  could  it  be  Concepcion, 
walking  so  painfully  with  bare  feet  over  the  rough 
cobbles  ? 
"  Vayan  Yds.  con  Dios"  said  the  beggar  at  the 
cathedral  door,  lifting  the  heavy  leather  curtain 
for  us. 

The  black  veil  still  hung  before  the  altar,  the 
bells  had  not  yet  spoken.  Life  seemed  at  a  stand- 
still. There  was  no  present,  only  the  momentous 
past,  in  the  Heart  of  Seville  that  bright  Sat- 
urday of  Glory.  In  the  coro  a  pair  of  stooping, 
weedy  old  men — twin  brothers — with  ancient  bas- 
soons under  their  arms,  several  violins,  flutes,  and 
bass  viols,  added  their  music  to  the  voices  of  the 
choir.  There  was  an  acute  sense  of  waiting,  of  hold- 
ing the  breath  in  anticipation  of  some  great  event. 
Concepcion  was  very  silent.  There  were  dark  rings 
under  her  dovelike  eyes.  In  a  moment  all-  was 
changed.  The  bells  of  the  Giralda  burst  out  in 
sudden  clamor.  Thunder  once  again  rolled  through 
the  cathedral,  the  black  veil  parted  and  fell  to  the 
ground,  revealing  the  retablo  of  Dancart.  In  this 
wonderful  altar-piece  the  sculptor  has  carved  in 
larchwood  the  story  of  the  life  whose  last  hours  on 
earth  Seville  has  been  living  over  again  during  the 
last  three  days!  It  is  all  here,  told  once  again  in 
faithful,  loving  art.  Instead  of  wandering  from 
chapel  to  shrine  to  read  it  pictured  in  marble, 
wood,  color,  miniature,  and  fine  needlework, —  an 
Annunciation  here,  a  Nativity  there,  it  is  all  here 
in  the  retablo  illustrated  by  a  series  of  marvellous 
wood  carvings.  Concepcion  studied  them  with 
me,  pointing  out  her  favorite  panels. 
"  Behold  the  blessed  Saint  Anne,  the  grand- 
mother of  God,  San  Jose,  husband  of  Nuestra  Se« 
flora.  These  be  Peter  and  Paul, — two  of  our  saints." 

*  They    are    saints     of    us    all,'*    Pemberton 
interrupted,  "  Christians  as  well  as  Catholics. 
Peter  and  Paul  pray  for  us  all!  " 

Concepcion  was  glad  of  that.  *  You  asked," 
she  said,  confidentially  to  me,  "  something  of  the 
blessed  saints.  At  the  convent  where  I  was  edu- 
cated, they  have  a  great  reverence  for  San  Jose. 
Last  year  the  nuns  were  in  much  need  of  a  house  in 
the  country  where  they  might  go  in  summer.  So 
they  tied  a  little  house  around  the  neck  of  the 
statue  of  San  Jose.  Well,  what  do  you  think? 
Last  August  a  lady  died  and  left  the  convent  her 
country  house.  Would  you  believe  it  ?  The  house 
is  exactly  like  the  little  house  the  sisters  tied  about 
San  Jose's  neck.  The  other  day,  being  in  great 
need  of  a  pig,  they  tied  a  small  pig  about  the  saint's 
neck.  That  prayer  has  not  been  answered,  but 
the  sisters  are  sure  that  they  will  have  their  pig 
before  the  month  of  Mary  is  over." 

'  Prophecies  sometimes  fulfill  themselves,"  said 
Pemberton.  "  What  Concepcion  tells  you  is  per- 
fectly true;  I  know  the  house;  it  is  just  possible 
some  one  in  the  convent  knew  it,  too.  Do  not  say 
so  to  Concepcion.  If  she  had  not  *  taken  up  ' 
with  me,  she  might,  some  day,  have  been  the 
prioress  of  that  convent." 

Domingo  de  la  Resurrecion 
There  was  little  sleep  in  Seville  the   night  of 
Sabbado  de  Gloria!  The  streets  were  crowded, 
the  music  and  the  laughter  Only  stopping  when  the 
Easter  bells  began  to  ring.  Under  our  windows 
three  boys  squatted  on  the  ground  playing  at  cards 
and  rattling  dice.  They  were  "flush  of  cash'* ;  perro 
chicos  and  grandes  clinked  as  they  changed  hands. 

"  Cacahuete! "  cried  the  peanut  man.  The 
largest  cardplayer  bought  a  double  handful  of  nuts, 
dividing  them  fairly  with  the  other  two. 

"  Ed!  los  altramuzes!  "  The  seller  of  lupins,  a 
peasant  in  a  brown  capa,  stopped  at  the  hail. 
After  some  haggling,  the  second  sized  boy  laid 
in  a  stock  of  the  large  green  lupin  beans  the  people 
eat  at  all  odd  times  of  day  and  night.  The  chicos 
munched  their  lupins,  spat,  and  munched  again, 
their  game  of  brisca  going  cheerfully  on,  not  without 
some  discussion.  The  smallest  lad,  he  who  wore 
a  working  blouse  and  a  blue  cap,  won  heavily. 
At  the  end  of  the  hand  he  scooped  the  coppers 
into  his  pocket,  scrambled  to  his  feet  and  strolled 
jauntily  away  singing : 

"  En  los  sopas  y  amores  los  primeros  son  los 
mejores  "  (with  soups  and  with  loves,  the  first  are 
the  best). 

"  Vengo  sofocado!  "  (I  suffocate  with  rage)  cried 
the  big  boy  who  had  lost  most.  "  Maldita  sia  iu 
estampa!  "  (accursed  be  thy  beastly  portrait). 

Was  he  mean  enough  to  draw  out  of  the  game 
when  he  was  winning?  The  winner  crossed  the 
street,  loitered  outside  a  sweets  shop  opposite,  flat- 
tened his  snub  nose  against  the  pane,  and  gazed 
at  the  goodies.  At  last  he  entered  the  shop,  reap- 
pearing with  a  paper  bag  full  of  sweets  of  Jijoha, 
cakes  of  almond  paste  and  honey.  The  cakes 
were  shared  equally,  the  big  boy  shuffled  the  cards, 
the  little  one  "  shook  "  for  deal,  and  the  interrupted 
game  of  brisca  began  again. 

Let  into  the  wall  of  the  corner  house  was  a 
shrine  with  a  lamp  before  it.  The  light  fell  on  the 
face  of  a  pretty  girl  behind  the  iron  bars  of  the 
lower  window.  She  was  talking  eagerly  with  a 
soldier  standing  outside  in  the  street,  a  lover, 
plucking  the  hen  turkey,  as  the  saying  goes. 

Easter  morning  we  went  to  the  cathedral  by  the 
sacristy,  filled  with  kneeling  women  in  black 
mantillas.  A  long  line  of  penitents  waited  outside 
each  confessional:  as  we  came  in,  Torquemada 
slipped  into  the  one  nearest  the  door.  At  the 
altar  rail  knelt  a  row  of  communicants.  An  old 
priest  and  a  young  server  walked  up  and  down  the 
ever  recruited  line,  administering  the  communion. 
The  server  carried  a  lighted  candle,  the  priest  a 
gold  chalice  with  the  wafer.  At  each  communicant 
they  stopped,  the  priest  took  a  wafer  from  the 
ciborium,  made  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  placed  it 
in  the  mouth  of  the  person  before  him. 

"  See  how  quiet  all  this  is,"  said  Pemberton; 
"  and  this  is  the  real  thing !  Now  for  the  cathedral, 
the  stage  of  the  church,  the  last  act  of  the  drama. 
Nowhere  in  the  world  can  you  see  so  splendid  a 
mass  as  you  will  see  to-day." 

Archpriests  and  priests  were  glorious  in  price- 
less embroidered  vestments.  Boys  and  acolytes 
must  have  been  chosen  for  their  beauty.  The 
little  fellows  were  like  cherubs;  the  elder  lads, 
like  angels.  The  boys  stood  in  groups  of  three, 
the  candles  burned  in  threes;  the  retablo  was 
lighted  by  trios  of  candles, —  the  mystic  number 
was  repeated  at  every  point.  On  the  lower  altar 
steps  stood  the  scarlet  and  ivory  altar  boys, 
each  holding  a  mighty  silver  candlestick,  so  tall 
that  the  base  of  the  candle  stood  at  the  height 
of  the  shoulder,  and  the  winged  silver  angel  sup- 
porting the  taper  rose  far  above  the  head.  From 
every  spire  of  the  great  retablo  sprang  a  crucifix,  the 
highest  towering  up  in  to  the  dim  roof.  Under  this 
crucifix  was  a  painted,  wooden  group  of  Virgin 
and  Child.  Directly  below,  in  a  straight  line,  one 
behind  the  other,  stood  the  three  celebrants  in  their 
Easter  splendor.  At  one  side  blazed  the  vast 
paschal  candle. 

"  It  is  of  the  most  fine  wax,"  Concepcion  whis- 
pered, "  and  of  the  weight  of  twelve  kilos." 

At  the  moment  of  the  elevation,  two  stiff,  gawky 
tourists,  Germans,  I  think,  stood  by,  guidebook 
in  hand,  staring  at  the  ceremony  with  no  pretence 
of  being  anything  but  spectators. 

The  Archbishop  held  up'  the  wafer  in  his  trans- 
parent old  hands;  thick  clouds  of  incense  rose;  at 
every  tinkle  of  the  golden  mass  bells,  Concepcion, 
kneeling  beside  me,  crouched  lower.  A  young 
deacon  in  a  white  robe  motioned  the  outlanders 
to  kneel.  They  paid  no  attention;  he  approached 
and  whispered  what  he  had  said  in  pantomime; 
again  they  refused.  Then,  like  a  young  archangel, 
he  drove  them  from  the  place  with  his  silver  staff. 
They  shrugged  stiff,  protesting  shoulders,  and 
moved  on. 

Mass  over,  a  procession  formed.  Two  cherubs 
walking  backwards,  held  open  the  illuminated 
missal  for  the  Archbishop  to  read  the  prayers; 
followed  Torquemada  and  the  other  priests,  the 
old  canons  from  the  coro,  the  choristers,*  their  long 
goffered  white  sleeves  folded  over  their  arms, 
their  black  letter  scores  held  between  them,  singing 
as  they  walked,  to  the  bassoon  accompaniment  of 
those  two  old  weedy  brothers.  Near  a  gigantic, 
faded  fresco  of  Saint  Christopher,  the  ferryman 
with  the  Nino  Jesus  on  his  arm,  they  stopped  beside 
the  tomb  of  Columbus,  a  brand  new  bronze  monu- 
ment in  the  aisle  that  makes  the  right  arm  of  the 
cross — a  place  of  high  honor.  Here  the  first  prayer 
was  recited.  We  waited  by  the  tomb,  watched  the 
procession  with  the  glittering  cross,  the  lights,  the 
incense,  the  booming  bassoons,  move  slowly  down 
the  aisle,  stopping  at  one  and  another  of  the  chapels. 

"  As  a  work  of  art  that  monument  is  simply 
impossible,"  said  Pemberton;  "  humanly,  it  means 
something.  You  catch  the  idea?  Those  four 
kings  in  armor  stand  for  Castille,  Leon,  Arragon, 
and  Granada.  In  that  sarcophagus  they  bear  on 
their  shoulders  lies  what  is  left  of  the  dust  of 
Columbus." 

A  vision  of  life's  morning  came  back  to  me! 
The  cathedral  at  Santo  Domingo  City  on  Easter 
day;  my  father,  my  mother,  and  myself  standing 
by  the  place  in  the  worn  brick  pavements  that 
then  covered  the  dust  of  the  Great  Admiral. 
There  had  been  a  mass,  with  incense  and  candles, 
and  splendid  priests,  that  Easter  in  Hispaniola, 
and  we  had  watched,  in  the  plaza  before  the 
cathedral,  Judas  burned  in  effigy! 

"  Columbus  was  born  to  wander!  "  said  Pem- 
berton. "  Even  his  poor  bones  have  no  rest. 
From  Valladolid,  where  he  died,  they  were  taken 
to  Seville;  from  Seville  to  Santo  Domingo;  from 
Santo  Domingo  to  Havana;  from  there, —  read  the 
inscription,  that  tells  the  story. 

"  Quando  la  ingrata  America  se  emandpe  de  la 
madre  Espana,  Sevilla  obtuvo  el  deposito  de  los 
restos  de  Colon  y  su  ayutamiente  eligio  este  monu- 
mento" 

"  The  sculptor  was  a  poor  artist  and  a  good 
Spaniard,"  said  Pemberton.  :*  In  spite  of  the 
thing's  being  so  baroque,  taken  with  the  inscrip- 
tion, and  the  date,  1901,  it  is  moving;  it  expresses 
the  pride  and  humiliation  of  this  brave  people 
who  won  the  new  world  only  to  lose  it.  I  tell 
my  friends  here  that  the  loss  of  Cuba  and  the 
Philippines  was  the  dawn  of  a  renaissance,  the 
beginning  of  a  new  Spain.  It  was  cutting  back 
the  vine  that  had  gone  to  wood.  Now  the  sap 
runs,  there  is  new  life,  fresh  growth.  Knock- 
down blows  are  what  men  and  nations  need  to  get 
up  their  muscle.  He  said  it, —  your  father:  *  Ob- 
stacles are  things  to  be  overcome! ' 

The  pigeons  fluttered  in  and  out  of  the  Giralda, 
careless  of  the  great  bells  swinging  to  and  fro,  and 
the  shadow  of  their  wings  wove  a  new  pattern  on 
the  face  of  the  roseate  tower. 

"  Christ  is  risen! "  The  bells  rang  out  the 
triumphant  pean.  A  shadow  larger  than  that 
cast  by  a  dove's  wing  passed  over  the  face  of  the 
Giralda. 

6  Take  Concepcion  home  with  you,"  said  Pem- 
berton, quickly,  in  English;  "  she  did  not  see  it. 
Do  not,  if  you  can  help  it,  tell  her."  He  led  the 
way  to  a  side  street,  made  some  excuse  to  his  wife, 
and  left  us.  We  took  Concepcion  home;  an  hour 
later  Pemberton  joined  us. 

*  There  was  nothing  to  do;  of  course  she  was 
quite  dead.  One  leaps  to  certain  death  from 
the  top  of  the.  Giralda.  You  remember  that 
woman  with  the  bruised  face  who  spoke  to  the 
Archbishop?  It  was  she;  his  name,  you  see, 
was  not  written  on  one  of  those  decrees  of 
pardon!  " 

Later  in  the  afternoon,  Concepcion  appeared, 
a  black  chenille  dotted  mantilla  of  the  old  style 
over  her  head,  a  white  manton  de  mantilla  worked 
with  purple  grapes,  draped,  Andaluz  fashion,  over 
her  shoulders. 

"  Are  you  ready  ?  "  she  cried.  Her  eyes  flashed, 
her  cool,  olive  cheeks  were  flushed.  She  smiled 
more  than  usual,  for  the  mere  pleasure,  it  seemed, 
of  showing  teeth  that  were  as  matched  pearls  on  a 
string. 

'*  Are  you  ready  ?  "  she  repeated.  '  Tengo 
mucha  prisa  "  (I  am  in  a  great  hurry). 

"  Ready  —  for  what, —  where  are  we  going  ?  " 

"  A  los  torros,  los  torros  (to  the  bulls) !  Did  he 
not  tell  you  ?  My  husband  has  taken  seats  for  us 
all  a  la  sombre  "  (in  the  shade). 

So  this  week  of  vigil,  penitence,  and  prayer  was 
all  a  preparation  for  the  Easter  bull-fight! 

"  I  have  seen  Bombito,  the  matador,  ride  by  on 
his  way  to  the  corrida"  said  Concepcion,  "  it  is 
time,  vamonos  a  la  callel  " 

There  was  a  disappointment  in  store  for  Con- 
cepcion; she  was  met  at  the  entrance  with  the 
announcement,  "  No  bull-fight  to-day  on  account 
of  the  picadors'  strike." 

Chapter V.  SEVILLE  FAIR 

THE  Guadalquiver  was  a  swollen,  tawny 
flood,  whirling  dead  leaves  and  dry  branches 
down  to  the  sea. 

"  Look,"  said  Pemberton,  "  the  river  has  piled 
enough  firewood  against  the  piers  of  Triana  bridge 
to  keep  a  thrifty  family  a  month."  A  small  boat, 
sculled  by  an  old  fisherman  with  gold  earrings  and 
a  blue  jersey,  crept  slowly  towards  the  largest  pile  of 
brushwood  at  the  middle  pier.  "I'm  glad  Isidro 
comes  in  for  that  bit  of  luck;  he  is  a  good  sort, 
brings  us  fish  every  fast  day,  and  doesn't  know  I 
have  a  bula  de  cruzada  and  may  eat  meat  o'  Fri- 
days. We  shall  see  him  at  the  house  soon;  when 
the  river  is  at  the  flood  we  sometimes  get  shad, — 
an  advantage  of  living  in  Seville." 

As  he  roped  the  driftwood  to  the  stern,  the  old 
fellow  sang  in  a  high,  quavering  voice  a  popular 
copla: 

"Antiquamente  eran  dulces  todas  las  aguas  del  mar; 
se  bano  mi  amor  en  ellas  y  se  volvieron  salas." 

(Once  on  a  time  all  the  waters  of  the  sea  were  sweet; 
My  love  bathed  in  them  and  they  turned  salt.) 

Other  women  are  praised  as  sweet,  the  Andaluz 
as  salt!  Andalusian  salt  is  the  supreme  quality, 
wit,  sparkle,  humor,  grace  combined. 

A  white  yacht,  a  fine  lady  of  the  sea,  lay  along- 
side the  river  bank  near  the  Paseo  de  las  Delicias. 
Sailors  were  busy  polishing  brass  that  shone  before, 
scrubbing  decks  already  clean  as  starched  damask. 
A  blond  viking  sitting  aft,  mending  a  sail,  sang  a 
stave  that  told  where  he  and  the  yacht  Peerless 
hailed  from. 

"  I  wish  I  was  in  Baltimore,  O,  O,  O,  O, 

A  dancing  on  the  sanded  floor  a  long  time  ago !  " 

By  the  Torre  del  Oro,  the  Buenaventura,  from 
Malaga,  a  rusty  freight  steamer,  was  taking  on 
cargo.  The  stevedores,  like  busy  brown  ants, 
trotted  to  and  fro,  stooping  under  bales  of  cotton 
from  the  Isla  Mayor  in  the  delta.  The  mole 
smelt  tarry  and  sea-faring;  looked  prosperous, 
bustling,  alive.  Watching  sailors,  stevedores,  long- 
shoremen, we  tried  to  visualize  our  emotions,  but 
alas,  the  set  pieces  of  sentimental  fireworks,  pre- 
pared beforehand,  wouldn't  go  off!  We  reminded 
ourselves  that  here,  in  this  port  of  Seville,  the 
Tribunal  of  the  Indies,  the  whole  trade  of  the 
Americas  once  centred.  From  the  shadow  of  that 
old  Moorish  tower  of  gold,  the  Spanish  galleons 
sailed  for  the  new  world,  carrying  the  yeast  and 
ferment  of  young  adventurous  blood,  bringing 
back  —  a  poor  exchange  —  the  ingots  of  the  Incas. 
Alas!  No  ghost,  not  even  of  Columbus  sailing  up 
the  Guadalquiver  that  Palm  Sunday  of  his  triumph, 
could  materialize  in  that  vital  atmosphere  of  oozing 
kegs,  fish-nets,  and  oakum.  A  swart  gypsy  dropped 
a  line  into  the  river,  a  crane  flapped  across  the  sky, 
a  fish  leaped,  flashing  silver  in  the  sun;  the  wonder- 
book  of  life  was  still  to  read ;  history  and  its  ghosts 
must  wait  for  old  age  and  winter  fireside. 

It  had  rained  for  three  days  and  nights,  to  the 
discomfort  of  flocks,  herds,  dealers,  breeders, 
gypsies,  and  compradores.  From  Ronda  and 
Utrera  in  the  south,  from  Huelva  in  the  west,  from 
Aguilar,  Lerida,  from  all  over  Andalusia,  the  ani- 
mals were  being  driven  in  for  the  Feria,  the  great 
animal  fair  that  follows  the  fiestas  of  Holy  Week. 

The  thrifty  ones,  early  on  the  ground,  were 
already  settled  in  the  city  of  tents  and  cottages, 
that  had  sprung  up  on  the  Prado  de  San  Sebastian. 
The  laggards  fared  badly;  the  downpour  had  made 
the  roads  worse  than  ever.  The  inns  were  crowded, 
for  even  those  who  usually  slept,  cooked,  and  ate 
in  their  covered  carts  struggled  to  get  under 
shelter  while  that  torrential  rain  lasted.  Then, 
just  in  time  to  save  the  situation,  the  sun  came 
out. 

From  the  quay  we  drove  along  the  bank  of  the 
Guadalquiver,  through  orange  groves  washed  clean 
and  smelling  of  rain,  and  olive  groves  where  the 
little,  silvery  leaves  were  still  dark  with  the  wetting. 
From  a  rise  in  the  sodden  road  we  saw  the  entire 
horizon,  felt  the  sky  like  a  fiery  blue  cup  overhead; 
at  the  edge,  where  it  rested  on  the  earth,  there  was 
warm,  colorless  light;  in  the  middle,  deep  cobalt. 
It  was  impossible,  early  as  it  was,  to  look  at  the 
sun;  there  was  not  a  fleck  of  cloud  anywhere. 
Though  the  earth  was  drying  as  quickly  as  sun  and 
soft  air  could  contrive,  the  middle  of  the  road  was 
still  a  lake  of  mud. 

"  Arre,  arrel  dog  of  a  horse! "  the  sounds 
of  blows  and  curses  shattered  the  crystal  silence. 
A  brave,  blind  horse  again  and  again  made 
a  mighty  effort,  stretching  its  lean  neck  and 
straining  its  poor  body  to  pull  a  carreta  out  of  the 
muddy  rut  where  the  wheels  stuck  fast.  His 
master  encouraged  him  by  striking  him  over  the 
head;  his  companion,  a  starved  dog,  by  snapping 
at  his  heels.  Pemberton's  hand  tightened  ner- 
vously on  his  whip,  as  if  he  would  have  liked  to  lay 
it  about  the  man's  ears:  Patsy  was  over  the  wheel 
like  a  flash,  and  out  in  the  muddy  road. 

*  What  a  pity,  my  friend,  your  wife  and  children 
must  get  out  to  lighten  the  load,"  he  said;  "it  is 
the  only  way;  I  have  had  great  experience  in  such 
matters.  You  help  them,  while  I "  he  had  the 
bridle  in  his  hand,  and  was  petting  the  panting 
horse  as  he  talked.  A  gaunt  woman  suckling  an 
infant  sat  in  the  back  of  the  carreta;  a  little  girl 
leaned  against  one  knee,  at  the  other  crouched  a 
boy  shaking  with  fever;  a  raven  drooped  in  a  bat- 
tered cage,  near  a  big  drum  half  hidden  by  a  heap 
of  spangled  and  velvet  rags ;  a  pair  of  castanets  and 
a  tambourine  lay  in  the  girl's  lap.  By  fffese  poor 
possessions,  their  tools  of  trade,  we  knew  them  for 
what  they  were. 

"  Mountebanks,  on  their  way  to  the  fair,"  said 
Pemberton;  "  poor  things,  one  can  hardly  hope 
they  will  add  much  to  the  gaiety  of  nations !  " 

"  See  you  later,"  said  Patsy,  waving  his  free 
hand  to  us.  We  drove  on  and  left  him  haranguing, 
hectoring,  but  helping,  always  helping,  that  for- 
lorn family  offeriantes  (fairgoers). 

After  those  three  last  days  of  Holy  Week,  when 
from  one  end  of  Seville  to  the  other  we  never  met 
wagon,  carriage,  or  beast  of  burden,  it  came  like 
a  surprise  to  find  the  streets  crowded  with  all  sorts 
of  interesting  vehicles.  The  heavy  traffic  is  carried 
in  big,  picturesque  carts  drawn  by  bulls,  oxen, 
donkeys,  and  mules.  The  cattle  are  magnificent, 
especially  the  bulls,  who  answer  easily  to  the  goad. 


The  backs  of  these  draft  animals  are  shaven  in 
patterns,  the  work  of  gypsy  esquiladores.  In  the 
cold  weather  a  blanket  covers  the  shaven  part,  its 
limits  outlined  by  a  neatly  cut  border.  A  mono- 
gram, a  coat-of-anns,  even  a  sentence  describing 
the  owner's  virtues,  is  sometimes  shaven  on  the 
rump.  The  yoke  is  bound  to  the  horns  of  the  cattle, 
as  you  see  it  in  the  old  Greek  vase  pictures;  the 
beasts  pull  with  the  head,  all  the  weight  and  strain 
coming  ^n  the  neck.  This  has  a  fine  pictorial 
effect,  but  is  far  harder  on  the  creatures  than 
yoking  at  the  shoulders. 

An  ox  cart,  with  a  cruel  load  of  stone,  drawn  by 
two  patient,  cream-colored  bulls,  lumbered  along  on 
archaic  solid  wheels  that  shrieked  for  axle  grease. 
The  bulls,  strong,  beautiful,  worthy  to  draw  the  car 
of  Dionysius,  moved  their  heads  restlessly  from 
side  to  side.  As  the  cart  jounced  over  a  loose 
cobble,  their  poor  noses  trembled  with  pain.  A 
street  porter  stood  waiting  till  the  cart  had 
passed  to  cross  the  road.  He  carried  a  heavy 
load  on  his  back,  secured  by  a  strap  fastened 
round  the  forehead;  he  trembled,  too,  and  seemed, 
like  the  bulls,  to  be  working  at  great  disad- 
vantage. 

Pemberton  shook  his  whip  at  the  bulls.  "  Cow- 
ards," he  cried,  "  failures,  outcasts  of  the  ring; 
too  timid  or  too  kind  to  fight, —  unworthy  the 
short,  merry  life  of  the  fighting  bull,  good  for 
nothing  but  work!  " 

A  blue  cart  with  ochre  stripes  creaked  by,  be- 
hind a  tandem  of  four  mules  led  by  a  white  donkey, 
all  jingling  with  little  bells,  the  harnesses  gay  with 
red  tags,  tassels,  and  brass  nailheads. 

"  Firme,  Jtrme  macho!  "  The  muleteer,  a  jolly 
young  chap  with  a  proper  "  going  to  the  fair  " 
look  to  match  his  team,  cracked  his  long  whip 
over  their  heads.  A  dog  tied  to  the  bridle  of  a 
tiny  donkey,  almost  hidden  by  his  load  of  cab- 
bages, cleverly  piloted  the  ass  through  the  crowd; 
the  owner,  a  stalwart  woman  laden  with  vegetables, 
followed  at  a  distance. 

"  And  some  people  say  animals  can't  reason!  " 
Pemberton  exclaimed.  '  That  dog  has  got  more 
sense  than  many  men  I  know.  The  woman  is 
Costanza,  Isidro's  wife,  who  brings  us  our  vege- 
tables every  day;  that  boy  tagging  behind  is  Con- 
cepcion's  godson." 

We  were  now  close  to  the  Feria,  and  the  way  was 
crowded  with  feriantes  and  cattle. 

There  was  a  sense  of  joyous  life  in  the  air. 
Everybody  was  in  holiday  humor,  as  if  the  sun  had 
dried  all  tears,  driven  away  blues  and  vapors,  if 
such  exist  in  golden  Seville. 

"  During  the  three  days  of  the  Feria,"  Pember- 
ton explained,  "  Seville  is  deserted;  life  centres 
here,  in  the  Prado  San  Sebastian;  trade,  business, 
society  are  bodily  transported  from  city  to  fair 
ground.  It's  really  a  democratic  festival;  a  great 
annual  outing  for  all  classes.  The  morning  is 
the  time  to  see  the  business  end;  the  evening,  the 
social.  We'll  begin  with  the  market,  where  the 
animals  are  bought  and  sold." 

At  the  mule  mart  business  was  brisk,  hand- 
some carriage  mules  as  well  as  pack  mules  changing 
hands  at  good  prices.  To  know  what  a  carnation 
or  a  mule  can  be,  you  must  go  to  Spain,  where 
both  grow  larger  and  handsomer  than  anywhere 
else.  There  is  a  legend  of  a  mule  belonging  to  the 
first  Don  Carlos,  over  fifteen  hands  high.  Theo- 
retically, the  mule  has  the  privilege  of  drawing  the 
royal  carriages.  Though  Don  Alfonzo  prefers  an 
automobile,  the  little  children  of  the  late  Princess  of 
the  Asturias  take  their  airing  every  day  behind 
a  spanking  four-in-hand  of  swift,  black  mules. 

Up  and  down  the  middle  of  the  Prado  San 
Sebastian  rode  the  jockeys,  showing  off  their  horses. 
A  tall,  black  stallion,  with  red  nostrils,  curvetted 
past.  The  man  on  his  back  —  he  rode  like  a 
centaur,  man  and  beast  seeming  one  piece  —  had  a 
familiar  look;  where  had  we  seen  that  ruddy  face, 
those  handsome  legs,  that  striped  blanket  before? 
The  fretting  stallion  jostled  a  white  horse  ridden 
by  a  weather-beaten  old  trader. 

"  Per  done  Vd.  amigo  mio! "  said  the  young  chalan, 
lifting  his  gray  felt  sombrero.  Then  we  recognized 
the  Sibyl's  friend,  the  bridegroom  of  Ronda. 

"  No  es  nada  amigo"  answered  the  man  on  the 
white,  as  politely;  the  exhibition  of  good  manners 
was  as  fine  as  the  horsemanship. 

"  I  will  give  you  twelve  thousand  reales  for  the 
black,"  said  a  gentleman  in  a  cloak,  to  the  man 
from  Ronda. 

"  Caballero,  if  I  could  only  afford  to  make  you  a 
gift !  Try  him,  he  has  the  perfect  paso  Castellano!" 

'  Twelve  thousand,  not  a  real  more." 

"  Antes  muerto  que  cansadol  "  (He'd  die  sooner 
than  tire.) 

*  Twelve  thousand,  not  another  maravedi." 
The  bargain  was  finally  struck,  chalan  and  cabal- 
lero  going  off  together  to  bind  it. 

"  The  pace  of  these  Andalusian  horses,"  Pem- 
berton  pointed  out,  "  is  easy  as  a  rocking-chair; 
there  is  nothing  like  it.  It  comes  from  their 
galloping  with  the  fore  feet  and  trotting  with  the 
hind.  Arabian  blood?  Ah!  there  is  the  mystery 
of  the  Cordova  breed.  Where  did  they  get  it? 
De  Soto  took  out  a  lot  of  the  stock  to  America; 
they  ran  wild  on  the  western  plains:  our  bronchos 
are  their  descendants.  Though  the  build  has 
changed,  you  recognize  the  family  traits  in  the 
American  mustang." 

The  white,  a  beautiful  fiery  creature,  with  floss- 
silk  mane  hanging  to  his  knees,  a  tail  that  would 
have  swept  the  ground  had  it  not  been  knotted  up, 
Patsy  was  convinced  must  be  an  Arabian. 

"He  looks  it,"  Pemberton  "allowed."  "The 
Arab  horse,  unfortunately,  is  not  what  it  once  was; 
it  has  been  spoiled  —  by  what,  do  you  think? 
The  Mauser  rifle!  In  the  old  days  a  Bedouin's 
safety  depended  on  his  horse's  speed;  to  outride 
his  enemy  and  the  reach  of  his  enemy's  spear  was 
his  prime  need.  Then  it  was  a  matter  of  life  and 
death  to  keep  up  the  breed.  The  old  order 
changeth,  even  in  the  desert.  Now,  the  Bedouins 
are  armed  with  rifles;  no  horse  can  travel  as  fast 
as  a  rifle  bullet  flies;  the  Bedouin  grows  careless, 
his  horse  deteriorates.  In  England,  where  they're 
all  mad,  there's  one  man  mad,  or  sane  enough,  to 
put  his  heart  and  his  money  into  trying  to  save 
the  noble  race  from  extinction,  the  sort  of  a  thing 
only  a  poet  like  Wilfred  Blunt  would  try  to  do." 

*  Tres,  ocho,  todos"  from  behind  a  gypsy  tent 
came  the  staccato  cry  of  the  morra  players.  Two 
men  faced  each  other,  throwing  out  the  hand  with 
a  quick  movement,  each  crying  at  the  same 
moment  his  guess  of  the  total  number  of  fingers 
shown;  a  dangerous  old  game,  ending,  too  often, 
in  a  fight. 

There  was  great  animation  in  the  pig  market; 
the  prices  were  the  highest  in  years;  the  demand  for 
sucking  pigs  was  larger  than  the  supply.  A  mag- 
nificent old  Mother  Grunt,  with  a  litter  of  black 
piglets  snuggling  about  her,  wore  the  blue  ribbon 
of  the  prize  winner  round  her  fat  neck.  The  owner, 
a  well-dressed  young  farmer,  stood  beside  the 
likely  family. 

"  May  I  have  a  photograph  of  the  pig  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  The  honor  is  great,"  said  the  farmer,  "  but 
the  photographer  lives  far  from  here,  and  to- 
morrow I  put  the  earth  between  us." 

"  How  foolish  thou  art!"  explained  a  shrewd 
old  farmer,  carrying  a  white  lamb  in  his  arms. 
"  It  is  the  little  black  box  of  the  stranger  lady  that 
makes  the  picture."  They  all  struck  attitudes,  the 
kodak  snapped,  I  set  the  film  for  the  next  shot; 
the  farmer  wished  to  look  into  the  kodak  where  he 
thought  he  could  see  the  photograph  of  the  prize 
pig.  The  matter  was  explained  to  him,  and  the 
offer  made  to  send  him  a  photograph  when  the 
film  should  be  developed.  J.  handed  him  his 
pencil  and  note-book,  and  asked  him  to  write  his 
name  and  address. 

"  Ojald,  if  I  only  knew  how  to  write !"  he  sighed. 
"  It  is  greatly  to  be  lamented.  I  should  value  a 
portrait  of  my  sow;  she  is  without  perad venture  the 
finest  I  have  raised.  I  shall  not  meet  her  again, 
for  I  have  sold  her  to  a  labrador  of  Jimena." 

"  Tell  me  your  name;  I  will  write  it  in  this  book, 
where  it  will  not  be  forgotten." 

"  I  call  myself  Basilio,  name  of  baptism,  Miquel; 
name  of  father " 

"  That  is  not  necessary;  from  what  town?  " 

!C  Pueblo  of  birth,  Escacena  del  Campo,  Pro- 
vincia  de  Huelva." 

Finding  us  interested  in  live  stock,  Miquel 
showed  his  other  animals,  and  led  the  way  to  the 
roped-in  corral,  where  a  bunch  of  his  sheep  stood 
hanging  their  patient  heads,  as  if  shy  to  find  them- 
selves so  much  admired.  The  merinos  were 
superb,  with  fine,  silvery  fleeces;  the  horns  of  the 
old  wether  might  have  inspired  the  Ionic  order! 
The  mere  rumor  of  such  splendid  creatures  would 
account  for  the  cruise  of  the  Argonauts.  As  hand- 
some in  their  way  were  the  small,  brown  sheep, 
with  black  faces  and  adorable,  close-curled,  black 
horns.  While  Miquel  and  J.  exchanged  views  on 
sheep,  a  seedy,  shabby  gentleman  in  shiny  clothes 
and  a  frayed  shirt  joined  us.  He  took  off  his  hat 
with  a  flourish,  and  made  me  a  deep  bow. 

"  Missis,  I  am  Renaldo  Lopez,  ex-ofeecial  de 
marina,"  he  said,  in  a  bass  voice,  deep  as  a  lion's. 
"  I  offre  my  service  to  accompany  and  visit  monu- 
ments; gib  Spanish  lessons  (spik  vero  Castellano, 
no  Andalusian)  in  pupils  resident  or  in  professor 
home,  prices  moderates."  He  recited  the  words 
as  if  repeating  a  lesson.  I  thanked  him,  accepted 
his  card,  and  turned  back  to  handsome  Miquel, 
who  was  explaining  to  J.  that  besides  raising  the 
best  wool  in  the  province,  he  was  not  behind  the 
rest  of  the  world  in  the  matter  of  wheat;  he  would 
dare  say  his  was  the  best  grown  within  a  hundred 
leagues.  If  we  passed  near  Escacena  del  Campo 
we  must  stop  at  his  farm.  He  could  show  us  the 
sister  of  the  prize  pig,  whose  photograph  we  would 
remember  to  send?  The  poor,  shabby-genteel 
ex-ofeecial  de  marina,  could  not  believe  that 
Miquel,  grower  of  the  best  wheat,  raiser  of  the  fat- 
test pigs  and  the  finest  sheep  in  the  province  was 
more  interesting  to  us  than  he  was!  Though  he 
could  not  read  or  write,  Miquel  could  carry  on  civ- 
ilization's two  great  basic  industries  —  provide  for 
the  clothing  and  the  feeding  of  man,  and  do  it  well ! 
The  professor  of  Castilian  clung  to  us  until  an 
appointment  was  made  for  a  lesson,  then  he  de- 
parted, and  we  wandered  off  to  the  refreshment 
stands. 

A  group  of  handsome  girls  were  gathered  round 
a  huge  cauldron  outside  a  neat  booth,  from  which 
floated  a  delicious  odor  of  fried  cakes. 

"Who's  hungry?" 

"Everybody!" 

"  Soledad!  "  A  tall  girl  in  a  clean,  print  dress, 
a  scarlet  shawl  pinned  across  her  shoulders,  a 
geranium  in  her  coarse  black  hair,  answered 
Pemberton's  call. 

"  Serve  bunuelos  for  all." 

I  asked  Pemberton  why  he  had  used  the  second 
person  instead  of  the  third,  in  speaking  to  Soledad 
—  what  a  name !  It  means  solitude. 

"  It  is  the  custom.  The  poorest  Spaniard  ad- 
dresses the  richest  gypsy  as  *  thou,'  on  the  ground 
that  the  Gitano  is  the  inferior  race.  These  people 
are  bunoleras;  they  travel  all  over  Spain  from  fair 
to  fair,  frying  these  bunuelos,  a  sort  of  sublimated 
fritter,  their  specialty.  No  one  else  has  the  art. 
I  know  this  family;  the  women  are  a  good  sort; 
the  men, —  lazy  rascals !  Last  summer  they  stole 
two  of  my  sheep;  lassooed  them,  lifted  them  clean 
out  of  the  fold.  I  traced  them  to  their  camp. 
What  do  you  suppose  I  found?  Instead  of  my 
white  sheep,  two  black  sheep;  they  had  the  stuff 
all  ready,  and  clapped  the  creatures  in;  by  the  time 
I  got  there  they  were  already  dyed." 

An  elderly  woman,  vigorous,  bronzed,  with  the 
bold,  unwinking  eyes  of  the  Romany,  stood  beside 
the  cauldron  making  mysterious  passes  with  a  long 
spoon.  Soledad  waited  by  her  side  with  a  hot 
dish,  and  in  a  twinkling  a  pile  of  golden  bubbles 
was  before  us,  light,  dry,  exquisite  as  only  fritters 
fried  in  pure  olive  oil  can  be. 

"  Fried  air,  with  a  trifle  of  pastry  around  it, 
is  not  exactly  filling  at  the  price,"  said  Pemberton; 
"  let  us  try  some  of  those  bocas  de  la  isla,  another 
specialty  of  the  Feria."  The  bocas  are  a  sort  of 
shell  fish  of  peculiar  shape,  tasting  rather  like  a 
shrimp.  Soledad,  watching  us  cautiously  taste 
them,  said  to  reassure  us: 

"  But  —  they  are  the  most  exqusite  —  what  a 
flavor!  They  are  the  claws  of  lobsters  that  have 
been  torn  off  and  thrown  back  into  the  sea,  where 
they  turn  into  bocas!  " 

"  Cocoanuts,  dates,  torrones  of  Alicante! "  a 
bright-eyed  Levantine,  smelling  trade,  hurried 
up  to  us.  We  bought  a  handful  of  large  dark 
Tetuan  dates,  a  green  cocoanut,  a  long  thin 
bottle  of  attar  of  roses,  and  —  a  torrone  —  a  paste 
of  blended  honey  and  almonds,  that  should  be 
reserved  for  saints,  since  none  others  can  be  good 
enough  to  deserve  it! 

Luncheon  over,  we  took  leave  of  Soledad,  and 
made  our  way  to  one  of  the  humbler  streets  of  the 
Feria  in  search  of  side  shows.  There  was  a  choice 
of  attractions,  all  of  them  decent.  In  one  tent 
we  saw  a  tame  gorilla  and  a  fat  woman;  in  an- 
other a  troupe  of  trained  fleas  shown  off  by  an 
Italian.  An  air  from  Rigoletto,  played  by  an 
orchestrion  with  drums,  horns  and  cymbals  drew 
a  crowd  of  rustics.  From  a  large  tent  came  the 
twang  of  a  guitar,  the  crack  of  castanets.  A  group 
of  saucy  gypsy  lasses  laid  violent  hands  upon  us 
Gorgios,  whose  palms,  whether  or  no,  they  were 
bound  to  read. 

*  Brazen  hussies,"  said  Pemberton  good- 
naturedly,  buying  them  off;  "a  cut  below  those 
others,  but  virtuous, —  who  doubts  it  may  get  a 
knife  thrust  in  the  back!  " 

Outside  the  last  and  poorest  amusement  tent,  we 
found  Patsy's  mountebanks.  An  old  carpet  was 
spread  on  the  ground  before  the  tent  door; 
the  woman  in  a  spangled,  maroon  velvet  robe, 
a  gilt  filet  in  her  faded  hair,  beat  the  big  drum. 
The  raven,  with  the  aid  of  the  little  girl  and  a  pack 
of  cards,  was  ready  to  tell  fortunes.  The  man  in 
pink  tights  balanced  cleverly  on  a  rolling  ball:  the 
boy  stood  with  outstretched  arms,  first  on  the 
father's  shoulders,  and  then  climbed  dizzily  to  his 
head.  The  turn  ended  in  a  clever  somersault. 

"  Olle,  olle!  "  the  crowd  encouraged. 

"  Que  te  hace  trabajar?  "  cried  the  mountebank, 
the  clown's  strident  voice  is  the  same  the  world 
over,  *  Que  te  hace  trabajar?  "  (What  makes  you 
work  ?) 

"  El  hambre!  "  (hunger),  answered  the  pinched 
child. 

"  Tiene  razonl  "  (he  is  right),  laughed  Miquel, 
the  farmer.  The  crowd  applauded;  a  few  coppers 
rattled  in  the  girl's  tambourine. 

We  came  upon  Patsy,  lost  since  morning, 
outside  a  booth  of  primitive  farming  tools.  The 
sickles,  the  rakes,  the  spades,  shaped  properly 
like  spades  in  a  pack  of  cards,  even  the  hoes, 
had  a  certain  rustic  beauty  that  woke  the  Adam 
in  every  boy  that  passed,  and  made  his  fingers 
itch  to  handle  them.  Patsy  balanced  a  mighty 
scythe  knowingly,  as  one  who  has  known  the 
trick  of  mowing. 

"  That  is  just  what  I  want  for  my  picture  of 
*  Time  and  the  Woman,'  "  said  J.;  he  looked  with 
longing  at  the  scythe. 

"  Of  course,  it  is  the  very  thing,"  said  Patsy; 
"  it  has  a  lot  of  character.  It  doesn't  look  as  if  it 
had  been  turned  out  by  a  machine  with  a  thousand 
others.  Listen  to  this  bell!  "  He  tinkled  the 
clapper  of  a  beaten-copper  sheep  bell.  '  What  a 
silver  note!  One  wouldn't  mind  being  wakened 
by  this,  when  the  cows  go  to  pasture  at  daylight!  " 

"  These  juggets,"  Pemberton  led  the  way  to  a 
booth  where  coarse  glazed  pottery  was  displayed, 
"  are  nice  in  color,  aren't  they  ?  " 

"  The  green  and  yellow  bowls  are  just  the  thing 
to  put  about  the  Cornish  place  for  the  birds  to 
drink  and  take  their  baths  from,''  said  Patsy. 
*'  Let  us  have  a  lot  sent  home  with  the  scythe  and 
the  bell.  How  you  feel  the  Moorish  influence  in 
the  design, —  you  can't  get  away  from  that,  can 
you  ?     You    might    as    well    try    to    subtract    the 
Norman  from  the  English,  as  to  subtract  the  Moor 
from  the  Spaniard;  you  come  across  him  every 
moment,  in  the  manners,  in  the  language  —  all  the 
words  beginning  with  al  are  Moorish;  in  the  dress,— 
the  mantilla  is  the  survival  of  the  yashmak;  in  the 
sense  of  color  and  design,  that  flat,  blue  dish  is  a 
thing  of  beauty  and  absolutely  Moorish  in  spirit." 

'  I  can't  enthuse  about  it  any  more  than  I  could 
about  the  Alhambra,  the  Alcazar,  or  anything  else 
that  recalls  the  presence  of  those  brutes  in  Spain," 
interrupted  a  small,  keen-eyed  man  who  had  been 
listening  to  the  talk. 

Patsy  was  the  first  to  recover  his  speech. 

'  That  is  a  new  point  of  view  and  very  inter- 
esting," he  said.  "  Does  all  Oriental  art  affect 
you  so,  or  only  Moorish  ?  " 

The  little  gentleman  answered  with  another 
question:  '  You  are  Protestants?  " 

We  could  not  deny  the  fact.  The  stranger 
sighed  impatiently.  "  Ah  well,  that  explains  many 
things!  No  traveler  who  is  not  a  Catholic  can 
understand  or  appreciate  Spain." 

'  You  can  enjoy  a  lot  you  don't  understand." 
Patsy  stood  to  his  guns. 

'  You  miss  the  history,  lose  the  background  of 
the  tapestry,"  the  stranger  went  on  testily.  "  I 
am  tired  of  this  fool  talk  about  Moorish  art;  the 
Mosque  of  Cordova  spoiled  by  being  turned  into  a 
Christian  church,  and  all  the  rest  of  it.  Rubbish ! 
I  say  it  was  a  good  thing  to  do!  "  His  eyes  shone, 
his  cheeks  burned,  he  held  up  a  hand  enforcing 
attention.  "  Listen  to  what  I  tell  you, —  Hell  is 
not  too  hot,  nor  eternity  too  long  to  punish  the  sins 
of  the  Moors  against  the  Christians  of  Spain." 

"  Do  you  know  where  you  are  standing  ? " 
Pemberton  struck  the  earth  with  his  heel  as  he 
said  it.  *  This  is  the  old  quemadero,  the  burning- 
ground  of  the  Inquisition.  On  this  spot  two 
thousand  persons,  many  of  them  Moors,  were 
tortured  and  burned  alive  in  one  year.  Is  there 
any  circle  in  your  Inferno  for  the  Grand  Inquisi- 
tors ?  " 

*  What  is  the  use  of  remembering  such  disa- 
greeable   things?     They    are    much    better    for- 
gotten!" cried  the  stranger,  irritably.     "I    took 
you  for  persons  of  more  sense!  "  and  he  went  off 
in  a  huff. 

"  I  wish  he  had  liked  us  better,  I  liked  him  so 
much,"  murmured  Patsy.  "  It's  the  first  rule  of 
travel,  isn't  it? — talk  with  people  you  would  not 
be  likely  to  know  at  home,  and  learn  their 
creeds." 

*  The  second  rule,"  said  Pemberton,  "  is,  visit 
different  epochs   as   well   as   different    countries. 
I   have  visited  in    the   Middle    Ages,   the   Dark 
Ages,  the  Ages  of  Stone  and  of  Iron;  only  the 
Golden  Age  I  have  not  found.  Seville  comes  near- 
est to  it!  Follow  the  old  trade  routes,  go 
where  the  bagmen  go,  make  friends  with  traders 
and  drummers.  The  gods  of  Greece  came  into 
Koine  in  the  chapman's  pack.  Avoid,  on  your 
life,  the  smug  hotels,  the  tourist  tickets  that 
make  the  great  pleasure  route  of  the  world  so 
comfortable,  so  safe,  so  dull.  Take  the  checker 
and  chance  of  travel.  There  is  as  much  ad- 
venture left  in  the  world  as  is  good  for  a  man,  if 
he  will  take  a  risk  or  two!  " 

*  The  third  rule  is,  buy  no  thing;  spend  all 
your  money  on  impressions;  they  will  be  good  as 
new  when  mementos  are  lost,  stolen,  or  in  the 
dust  bin!" 

"  The  fourth  rule,"  said  J.,  "  is  go  slow. 
Yesterday  three  hundred  tourists  saw  Seville  in 
four  hours.  They  were  driven  all  over  the  place 
in  batches,  each  man  and  woman  of  them  tagged 
with  the  card  of  the  hotel  where  they  were  billeted 
to  dine.  The  Liberal  said  this  morning  that  it  was 
better  to  be  four  hundred  years  behind  the  world 
than  to  be  in  such  a  hurry.  I  am  not  sure  the 
Liberal  is  not  right." 

That  afternoon,  Concepcion  called  for  us  in  a 
smart  two-seated  cart  drawn  by  fawn-colored 
mules  with  silken  ears,  varnished  hoofs,  and 
jingling  bells.  It  was  "  up  to  her,"  Pemberton 
said,  to  show  us  the  social  end  of  the  Feria. 

"  Estoy  vestida  de  may  a!  "  she  cried  gleefully; 
"  does  it  please  them  ?  " 

"  How  well  dressed  she  is,  a  preciosity!  "  Patsy's 
vocabulary  was  growing.  To  be  vestida  de  maya 
means  to  wear  the  lovely  old  Andalusian  costume, 
still  good  form  for  Feria  and  bull-fights.  Con- 
cepcion  wore  a  yellow  crape  manton  de  Manilla 
(the  fringe  was  ten  inches  long)  embroidered  with 
butterflies  and  roses;  a  white,  blond  lace  mantilla, 
gold  satin  skirt  with  overdress  of  black  net  and 
chenille  dots,  lace  mittens  and  tiny  gold  shoes. 
She  carried  the  sort  of  fan  collectors  outside  of 
Spain  keep  in  a  glass  case, —  the  sticks  of  delicately 
carved  mother-of-pearl;  the  painting,  charming, 
eighteenth  century  miniature  work.  The  artist 
had  represented  the  two  serious  affairs  in  woman's 
life :  religion, —  illustrated  by  a  scene  from  sacred 
history,  Jerusalem  with  David  standing  before 
Saul;  and  love-making, —  illustrated  by  an  Arcadian 
vale,  where  a  patched  and  powdered  shepherdess 
and  a  silk-stockinged  shepherd  looked  fondly  at 
each  other. 

Concepcion  took  us  first  to  the  Parque  Maria 
Luisa,  once  royal  property;  now  a  people's  pleasure 
ground,  more  garden  than  park,  with  thickets  of 
camelias,  white,  red,  and  pink,  and  wildernesses 
of  roses  climbing  over  rustic  arbors,  hiding  dead 
trees,  or  blooming  sedately  in  well-trimmed  beds. 
We  would  have  lingered  in  this  paradise  among 
the  palms  and  orange  trees — from  an  ilex  grove 
the  long,  trilling  cadence  of  a  nightingale  gave 
warning  that  the  evening  service  of  song  was  be- 
ginning— but  Concepcion  objected  that  there  was 
nobody  there,  and  gave  the  order:  "  To  Las 
Delicias." 

Four  lines  of  carriages  moved  at  a  foot  pace  up 
and  down  the  wide  paseo.  Groups  of  horsemen, 
officers  and  civilians  picked  their  way  through 
the  throng.  The  promenades  on  either  side  were 
crowded  with  pedestrians.  The  defile  of  beauty 
was  dazzling;  the  senoritas  were  all  smiles  and 
animation,  using  their  eyes  to  deadly  purpose;  in 
Andalusia  flirtation  is  not  a  lost,  even  a  decadent 
art.  Patsy,  wounded  on  every  side,  groaned  aloud, 
"I  wish  I  was  a  Turk,  I  wish  I  was  the  Sultan  of 
Turkey!" 

"  In  his  heart,  every  man  is  a  Turk!  " 

"  Starts  so, —  some  learn  that  the  best  of  all  is 
to  come  home  from  a  flower  show,  and  find  the 
single  rose  in  the  flower-pot  on  the  window-sill, 
sweeter  than  all  the  rest." 

So  they  gossipped  in  the  carriage,  while  the 
mouse-colored  mules  fretted  at  the  slow  pace! 

The  west  end,  the  fashionable  quarter  of  the 
toy  city  of  the  Feria,  has  neat  toy  streets,  dainty 
casetas  like  dolls*  houses,  cafes,  and  clubs.  From 
Concepcion's  account,  it  would  seem  that  the 
Alcalde  had  merely  waved  his  wand,  and  from  the 
bare  ground  of  the  old  quemadero  the  fairy  city 
had  sprung  complete.  9 

(  You  hire  your  caseta  for  the  week,"  Pemberton 
explained,  "  and  send  out  what  furniture  you  need 
from  your  town  house."  As  it  grew  dark,  gar- 
lands of  many-colored  lights  festooned  the  way; 
firefly  lamps  twinkled  among  the  shrubbery, 
lanterns  like  great,  illuminated  fruits  bloomed  out 
from  the  dark  trees;  it  seemed  that  we  were  wan- 
dering in  Aladdin's  palace.  Between  the  Moorish 
arches  of  the  Circole  de  Labradores  we  caught 
a  glimpse  of  a  pretty  ball-room,  where  a  crowd  of 
waltzers  swayed  to  the  music  of  the  Thousand  and 
One  Nights.  Outside  a  private  caseta  painted  like 
a  Japanese  tea  house,  Patsy  halted  and  stood 
immovable,  till,  as  one  by  one  the  crowd  moved  on, 
we  edged  our  way  to  the  front.  The  caseta  was 
open  to  the  street.  Across  a  tiny  verandah  we 
saw  the  charming  interior.  An  elderly,  bald 
gentleman  sat  at  a  piano  playing  the  letter  air 
from  La  Perichole.  In  a  corner  a  group  of  ladies 
talked  together;  a  little  girl  in  white  came  and 
hung  over  the  piano,  watching  the  musician's 
fingers. 

A  tall  young  officer  with  a  roving  blue  eye  and 
gold  hair  lying  in  crisp  little  curls  on  an  ivory 
forehead,  stood  leaning  against  the  wall,  talking 
with  a  small,  dark  youth  with  a  hawk  nose,  and 
black,  impenetrable  eyes  where  the  fire  smouldered 
but  did  not  flash. 

"  That  good-looking  boy  is  Martin  O'Shea," 
said  Pemberton;  "  Irish  —  need  you  ask?  The 
family  has  been  settled  here  a  hundred,  perhaps 
three  hundred  years;  his  eye  has  not  lost  the  Celtic 
light,  or  his  tongue  the  edge.  The  other  is  Bena- 
miel,  Moorish  descent,  of  course;  they're  both 
dangling  after  a  certain  girl,  a  friend  of  Concep- 
cion's.  Oh !  that  is  part  of  the  fascination  of  this 
wonderful,  aloof,  old  Spain;  you  can  trace  the  races 
here  so  clearly;  somehow  the  strains  don't  seem  to 
have  become  so  blurred,  so  mixed,  as  in  most 
parts  of  Europe." 

The  two  young  men  cast  impatient  looks  at  a 
curtained  door  at  the  back.  "  Pronto"  the  signal 
came  from  the  inner  room.  The  music  changed 
to  a  throbbing  seguidUla,  the  curtain  trembled, 
and  out  tripped  two  pretty  girls  vestida  de  maya. 

"  Do  you  see  who  it  is  ? "   whispered  Patsy. 

The  taller  was  Luz,  the  other  could  only  be  her 
sister.  Their  castanets  clicked,  almost  as  naturally 
as  fingers  snap,  as  they  took  the  first  pose  of  the 
dance.  One  foot  advanced,  the  other  behind 
supporting  the  weight  of  the  body;  the  right  arm 
raised,  the  left  extended,  just  as  you  see  it  in  the 
dancing  faun  of  Herculaneum.  O'Shea  took  down 
a  guitar  from  the  peg  where  it  hung,  and  swept 
the  chords  with  that  curious  ringing  touch  of  the 
Spaniard;  Benamiel  marked  time  by  beating  with 
his  feet,  clapping  with  his  hands.  The  dance 
began.  It  was  very  graceful,  above  all  very 
expressive,  that  was  the  great  quality;  it  seemed 
the  natural,  spontaneous  expression  of  those  two 
lovely  young  creatures'  joy  in  life,  of  their  super- 
abundant vitality,  of  the  young  blood  coursing 
through  their  veins.  Though  every  posture,  each 
bold  advance  and  timid  retreat  was  old  as  Egypt, 
the  dance  had  all  the  beautiful  freshness  of  a 
primitive  art. 

"Viva  la  gracia!  "  The  cry  came  from  a  man 
in  the  crowd,  Miquel,  the  farmer  of  Huelva. 

"  Good  work  for  amateurs,"  said  Pemberton, 
"  but  wait  till  you've  seen  the  Imperio,  then  you 
will  have  an  idea  of  what  Spanish  dancing  is!  " 

"  Why,"  Patsy  asked,  "  doesn't  that  other  girl 
dance  ?  " 

"  Just  because  she  is  not  a  girl;  she  was  married 
two  years  ago.  It  would  not  be  good  form;  she 
has  had  her  turn,  now  she  must  take  a  back  seat 
and  give  the  others  a  chance.  Thank  God  we're 
still  at  that  stage  of  social  development."  The 


young  woman,  a  small  morena  (brunette)  with  a 
skin  like  a  creamy  magnolia  blossom  just  be- 
ginning to  turn  brown,  was  very  little  older,  and 
quite  as  pretty  as  the  twin  dancing  stars;  her  foot 
tapped  the  floor,  while  her  sisters  danced  and  she 
sat  talking  with  the  elders. 

"  I  think  this  could  not  happen  outside  of 
Spain,  the  most  democratic  of  all  countries," 
Pemberton  went  on.  '  Here  every  man  is  equal, 
not  merely  in  the  law's  eye,  but  —  what's  far  more 
important  —  in  his  own  eyes,  and  proves  it  by 
allowing  no  other  man  to  show  better  manners  than 
he.  These  girls,  the  fine  flower  of  Seville,  may 
safely  take  their  part,  add  their  beauty  and  their 
grace  as  the  crowning  attraction  of  the  Feria, 
because  the  man  in  the  street  will  be  as  polite  to 
them  as  the  gentleman  in  the  drawing-room." 

"  Bendita  sea  la  madre  que  ti  pario"  blessed 
be  the  mother  that  bore  thee.  It  was  Miquel's 
parting  compliment  to  the  senoritas,  as  he  made 
his  way  out  of  the  crowd.  In  the  caseta  visitors 
came  and  went;  Luz  was  surrounded  by  admirers. 
An  old  man  servant  handed  a  tray  with  agraz, 
a  drink  made  of  pounded  unripe  grapes,  clari- 
fied sugar  and  water,  and  bolardos,  little  sugar 
cakes  to  dissolve  in  this  nectar  of  Andalusia.  The 
seyuidilla  was  followed  by  a  sevilliana.  When 
the  buoyant  feet  seemed  tired  O'Shea  sang  copla 
after  copla:    the  last  he  might  have  learned  from 
his  mother.     It  is  at  least  as  old  as  he: 
"Dos  besos  tengo  en  el          Two  kisses  I  have  in  my 
alma  soul 
que  no  se  apartan  de  mi;     That  will  not  part  from 
me; 
el  ultimo  de  mi  madret          The  last  my  mother  gave 
me, 
y  el  primero  qive  te  di."       And  the  first  that  I  gave 
thee. 

Chapter VI A  HOUSE  IN  SEVILLE 

RODRIGO,  Pemberton's  son,  a  grave  child 
with  eyes  of  brown  fire,  met  us  at  the  gate  of 
the  patio;  by  his  side  stood  a  white  lamb,  with  a 
wreath  of  yellow  primroses  round  its  neck. 

"  You  recognize  the  fleece  of  Huelva  ?  "  said 
Pemberton,  "  this  is  one  of  Miquel's  flock;  every 
child  must  have  its  pet  lamb  at  Easter,  you  know." 
He  opened  the  ancient  iron  gate, —  the  bars  were 
lilies,  tenderly  wrought  as  if  of  a  more  precious 
metal, —  and  we  passed  through  the  Zaguan  (vesti- 
bule) into  the  patio  paved  with  marble,  surrounded 
on  all  four  sides  by  a  corridor  like  a  cloister.  Be- 
hind the  Moorish  columns,  graceful  as  palm  trees, 
were  walls  lined  with  azulejos,  blue,  green,  yellow 
glazed  tiles  of  fascinating  design,  bewildering  color. 
In  the  middle  of  the  patio  a  jet  of  water  leapt  from 
an  urn,  danced  in  the  sun,  broke  into  a  shower  of 
living  diamonds,  fell  laughing  to  a  marble  basin. 

"  In  summer  we  practically  live  in  this  patio, 
that  long  bamboo  chair  is  my  favorite  place.  I 
lie  there  and  read,  or  puzzle  out  the  designs  on 
those  tiles, —  they're  over  a  hundred, —  and  listen 
to  the  fountain  and  the  birds.  What  more  does  a 
man  want  in  hot  weather?  Take  care,  Rodrigo, 
don't  drown  him!  " 

The  child  was  trying  to-  make  the  lamb  drink; 
the  gold  fish  darted  from  side  to  side  in  fright  as  its 
pink  nose  ruffled  the  water. 

"  We're  still  living  up-stairs;  by  Corpus  Christi 
we  shall  have  embajado,  as  they  say  here.  That 
means,  moved  down-stairs.  It's  the  universal  cus- 
tom —  the  poorest  house  in  Seville  has  two  stories, 
the  upper  for  cold  weather,  the  lower  for  hot;  you 
can't  fancy  the  difference  in  the  climate.  When 
moving  day  comes,  the  awning  is  drawn  over  the 
patio,  we  bring  all  the  furniture  from  the  upper  to 
the  lower  rooms  —  exactly  the  same  size  and  shape, 
so  everything  fits  —  hang  pictures  and  mirrors 
in  the  corridor;  put  the  piano  here,  the  plants  from 
the  terrace  there  between  the  columns.  We'll 
have  a  look  at  the  summer  quarters,  if  you  like;  it 
may  give  you  some  idea  of  how  we  live  in  Seville 
in  hot  weather." 

We  followed  him  through  large,  dark  rooms, 
high-ceiled  and  airy;  caught  glimpses  of  a  mighty 
marble  bath  in  a  cool  green  chamber,  of  a  kitchen 
where  they  cook  with  charcoal,  and  finally  halted 
in  a  place  mysterious  as  an  alchemist's  laboratory. 

There  were  cauldrons  of  beaten  copper,  measures 
for  wet  and  dry,  an  antique  balance  with  brass 
weights,  strange  glass  vessels,  a  press,  an  old  still. 
As  we  stood  admiring  a  huge  marble  mortar, 
Concepcion  came  into  the  laboratory.  She  wore 
a  short  white  dress  and  apron,  and,  on  her  chate- 
laine, a  bunch  of  big  keys. 

"  Always  on  time! "  Pemberton  exclaimed.  "  At 
half  past  nine  every  morning  Concepcion  unlocks 
the  despensa,  and  gives  out  whatever  is  needed 
for  the  day." 

'  The  grapes  for  the  agraz  are  pounded  in 
that  mortar,"  said  Concepcion,  who  saw  I  was 
interested  in  the  strange  vessels,  "  and  those  big 
stone  rollers  are  used  for  crushing  and  grinding  the 
chocolate." 

'  Do  you  remember  how  good  the  smell  of  choco- 
late is,  when  they  are  making  you  a  cup  at  home  ?  " 
said  Pemberton.  "  Imagine  what  it  must  be  to 
have  the  whole  house  filled  with  it!  Ah!  the 
making  of  the  chocolate  is  an  important  event. 
Rodrigo  and  I  are  always  impatient  for  it  to 
begin." 

'  When  the  time  has  come  to  make  the  choco- 
late," Concepcion  went  on,  "  the  cacao  is  bought. 
It  comes  in  great  sacks, —  the  best  from  the 
Havana,  cinnamon  from  Ceylon  —  being  sure  it  is 
the  most  fresh  —  sugar  the  finest,  and  supreme 
vanilla.  When  all  is  ready,  we  call  the  choco- 
lateros,  two  good  men,  who  make  the  chocolate 
under  my  direction,  according  to  a  family  recipe. 
When  it  all  is  finished,  it  is  poured  out  into  those 
large  troughs  to  cool.  Then  it  is  cut  in  squares; 
each  large  square  is  just  big  enough  to  make  a  cup 
of  chocolate  for  grown-up  people;  and  the  little 
squares  to  make  the  children's  chocolate.  When 
hard,  it  is  put  away  on  these  shelves;  as  the 
cupboard  is  airy  it  keeps  itself  for  a  year."  When 
she  learned  that  some  housekeepers  bought  their 
chocolate  ready  made,  Concepcion  was  scandal- 
ized. "  It  will  be  mixed  with  flour  of  chestnuts, 
or  other  inferior  things;  there  is  no  chocolate 
like  the  Andalusian!"  she  declared. 

In  the  despensa,  a  cool,  stone  grotto,  hams, 
sausages,  dried  herbs,  onions,  and  scarlet  peppers 
hung  from  the  roof;  a  dozen  bloated  goatskins 
leant  against  the  wall. 

"  The  oil,"  Pemberton  explained,  "  was  brought 
in  from  the  farm  on  mule-back  this  morning. 
When  it  settles,  we  shall  draw  it  off  in  those 
amphorce;"  he  pointed  to  a  row  of  two-handled, 
red  clay  jars.  "  Those  tarros  are  full  of  pork, — 
we  killed  a  hundred  pigs  last  November.  The  best 
of  the  meat  is  sent  in  town  to  us,  the  rest  is  kept  at 
the  farm  for  our  work  people;  we  feed  our  laborers 
in  Andalusia,  you  know,  and  feed  them  well." 

Concepcion  told  us  that  she  herself  always  gave 
out  the  day's  provisions;  this  was  important,  else 
disastrous  things  might  happen.  She  stood  by 
and  saw  cook  take  the  pork  from  the  tarro, 
where  it  was  packed  in  the  "  butter  of  pig, " 
or  the  game  from  the  smaller  barrels.  These 
lower  ones  were  full  of  the  partridges  Pemberton 
shot  last  season;  some  days  he  got  a  dozen, 
some  days  twenty.  Those  that  were  not  eaten 
or  given  away  were  slightly  boiled  and  packed 
in  the  butter  of  pig.  They  would  keep  six  months 
if  great  care  were  used  in  taking  them  out,  and 
only  the  wooden  spoon  touched  the  pig  butter. 
If,  as  had  happened,  a  careless  servant  puts  in  her 
hand  to  take  out  a  partridge  or  a  bit  of  pork,  the 
whole  tarro  is  lost;  nothing  can  save  it  from  going 
bad.  The  same  is  true  of  olives,  put  up  in  those 
tall  tinajas.  Once  a  human  hand, —  a  metal 
spoon  is  almost  as  bad, —  is  dipped  into  that  home- 
made pickle  of  vinegar,  water,  lemon,  salt,  and 
laurel  leaves,  the  whole  tinaja  is  ruined. 

*  These  nice  comfortable-looking  round  jars 
are  made  especially  to  hold  Manchegan  cheeses," 
said  Pemberton.  *  They're  like  Parmesan,  only 
better,  made  of  sheep  and  goats'  milk  mixed. 
Once  a  year  they  bring  them  from  La  Mancha  to 
sell;  we  always  lay  in  a  large  stock;  packed  in  those 
jars,  with  enough  oil  poured  in  to  cover  them,  they 
keep  indefinitely.  Here  is  the  cook.  The  momen- 
tous council  of  the  day  is  about  to  open.  Come, 
I'll  show  you  the  rest  of  the  house,  while  Con- 
cepcion  gives  the  orders.  We'll  have  a  look  at  the 
roses  first." 

Behind  the  patio  was  a  second  court,  with  orange 
and  lemon  trees;  at  one  end  grew  an  ancient  cedar 
with  hollow  trunk  and  strange  roots,  like  splay 
feet,  that  gripped  the  earth.  A  whiff  of  orange 
blossoms,  the  tinkle  of  a  guitar,  the  voice  of  an 
unseen  singer  chanting  a  low  wailing  malagena 
greeted  us  as  we  entered.  The  walls  were  a  living 
glory  of  roses;  the  yellow  Bankshires  hung  in  starry 
bunches;  the  white  rose  vines  flung  out  floating 
banners  of  green,  thick  sprinkled  with  rose  snow. 
A  golden  pheasant  strutted  and  preened  itself  in 
the  sun;  from  an  aviary  came  the  chatter  of  a  happy 
family  of  birds. 

"  Hi  jo  de  mi  alma,"  Pemberton  said  to  Rodrigo, 
"  you  may  not  take  the  lamb  up-stairs;  stay  with 
him  till  we  come  down." 

Rodrigo,  nothing  disappointed,  drew  out  a 
little  cart,  and  seating  himself  in  it  turned  the 
wheels  so  that  the  cart  slid  along  the  stone  path  in 
the  middle  of  the  garden,  the  lamb  trotting  beside; 
back  and  forth,  back  and  forth,  we  heard  the  rat- 
tling of  those  wheels  (I  can  hear  them  still)  as  the 
lonely  boy  and  the  lamb  played  together. 

"  Did  you  ever  see  a 'game  of  football  ?"  Patsy 
asked  the  child.  Rodrigo  had  only  seen  pictures 
of  football,  but  he  had  seen  pelota,  and  he  could  hit 
the  bull's-eye  with  his  arrow  three  times  out  of  five. 

"  Rodrigo  is  a  Spaniard;  he  is  going  into  the 
army,"  Pemberton  said,  as  he  led  the  way  up-stairs 
to  the  winter  quarters.  "  My  grandmother  was  a 
Spaniard;  my  parents  called  themselves  '  cosmo- 
politans'; some  other  people  called  them  dis- 
gruntled Americans.  I'm  a  man  without  a  country, 
—  one  of  that  kind  is  enough  in  a  family!  " 

He  flared  up  with  sudden  passion.  To  make  a 
diversion  J.  complimented  him  on  the  winter 
parlor,  a  bare,  comfortable  room  with  a  few  good 
pictures,  the  necessary  furniture  and  a  refreshing 
absence  of  junk. 

"  No  little  tables  of  jointed  silver  fish  and  jade 
idols  here  ?  "  he  said.  "  We're  still  half  Orientals 
in  Seville;  we  don't  suffer  from  the  dreadful  *  too 
much  '  that  is  stifling  you  in  America!  " 

The  winter  kitchen,  all  white  marble  and  tiles, 
had  a  gas  range,  the  most  modern  thing  in  the 
house,  and  deal  tables  scrubbed  with  soap  and 
sand  till  you  saw  the  grain  of  the  wood.  Something 
was  said  about  the  exquisite  neatness  of  the  house. 

"  Andalusians,"  Pemberton  assured  us,  "  are 
remarkably  clean  people.  Did  you  notice  our 
calle?  You  don't  often  see  a  street  so  well  kept. 
Each  householder  is  obliged  to  take  care  of  the  part 
before  his  house;  competition  is  a  good  principle  in 
street  cleaning." 

The  upper  corridor,  giving  access  to  the  winter 
rooms,  was  shut  in  with  glass;  it  led  to  the  azotea, 
a  terrace  that  overhung  the  court  of  roses.  The 
flowers  here  had  more  sun  and  air  than  in  the  patio; 
the  carnations  were  as  big  as  coffee  cups,  the 
damask  roses  as  large  as  saucers.  A  second  flight 
of  stairs  led  up  to  the  winter  bed  and  dressing- 
rooms. 

"  These  mattresses  are  of  carded  wool/'  said 
Pemberton;  "  the  blankets, —  feel  how  light  and 
soft  they  are, —  were  made  at  the  farm,  spun  and 
woven  by  an  old  woman,  the  last  survivor  of  my 
grandmother's  servants.  These  sheepskins  are 
spread  under  the  mattresses  for  warmth,  for  tiled 
floors  are  cold.  The  fleece  is  of  three  years' 
growth;  see,  it  is  as  fine  as  silk." 

Laundiy,  drying-room,  and  terrace  for  bleaching 
and  airing,  were  at  the  top  of  the  house.  The  keen 
smell  of  good  gum  camphor  met  us  on  the  stair; 
it  came  from  a  brass-bound  cedar  chest,  standing 
open  on  the  terrace.  A  dozen  of  Concepcion's 
feather  fans  dangled  from  a  line. 

"  Now  that  you've  seen  the  house  in  Seville 
God  has  given  me,"  said  Pemberton,  "  look  at  the 
view;  it's  the  best  thing  about  it!  " 

Below  us  lay  the  city  with  its  narrow  calles, 
sunny  plazas,  shining  houses.  In  every  patio,  on 
every  terrace  and  roof  garden  were  flowers  and 
caged  birds.  The  air  was  musical  with  bells,  song, 
laughter.  Outside  the  old  Roman  city  walls, 
spread  the  green  Andalusian  vega,  with  the 
yellow  river,  gleaming,  where  the  sun  touched 
it,  like  clouded  amber.  In  the  distance  the  vega 
was  shut  in  by  a  circle  of  blue  Sierras;  snow  lay 
on  the  shoulders  of  the  hills,  at  whose  feet  the  fruit 
trees  were  in  blossom. 

"  Can  anybody  ever  be  sad  in  Seville  ?  "  cried 
Patsy.  "  Do  people  ever  die  or  grow  old  here  ? 
Are  there  such  things  as  tears  ?  " 

*  There  is  a  young  lady  down-stairs  who  must 
have  shed  a  quart  of  tears  since  yesterday,"  said 
Pemberton.  "  Come  and  help  Concepcion  com- 
fort her."  He  led  the  way  down  to  the  drawing- 
room.  Sitting  beside  Concepcion,  whose  hand  she 
had  been  holding,  was  a  pretty  girl,  wearing  a 
dress  much  too  large  for  her. 

"  Mi  amiga,  Senorita  Trinidad  Fulano,"  Con- 
cepcion introduced  her  friend,  who  tried  to  look 
as  if  she  had  not  been  crying.  Our  hostess  then 
bustled  out  of  the  room,  and  returned,  followed  by 
a  neat  maid  with  a  tray  of  preserved  sweet  pota- 
toes, some  huevos  dulces,  a  sort  of  sweetmeat  made 
of  sugar  and  yolk  of  egg,  a  delicate  decanter,  and  a 
straw  basket  containing  twelve  long  thin  glasses 
no  bigger  round  than  a  walking  stick. 

"A  cana  of  manzafiilla,"  said  Pemberton,  pouring 
out  a  clear  amber  liquid.  "  It  is  light  for  Spanish 
wine,  no  headache  in  it."  Patsy,  Concepcion  and 
Trinidad  were  already  chattering  together  like 
three  magpies  at  the  other  end  of  the  room.  In 
the  solemn  silence  that  accompanied  the  tasting 
of  the  manzafiilla,  Concepcion's  voice  rang  clear. 

"  For  a  woman  to  call  herself  beautiful, 
she  must  possess  the  nine  essentials  of  beauty. 
Three  things  must  she  have  that  be  black, —  the 
hair,  the  eyes,  the  lashes;  three  that  be  red, —  the 
lips,  the  palms,  the  cheeks;  three  that  be  white, — 
the  hands,  the  neck,  and  the  teeth." 

Trinidad  nodded.  :<  C/aro,"  she  said,  "  she 
has  expressed  it  divinely." 

'  Trinidad  could  hardly  say  less,"  Pemberton 
observed,  "  seeing  that  she  herself  possesses  the 
nine  indispensables.  That  is  a  Moorish  proverb, 
though  Concepcion  learned  it  from  the  nuns,  like  the 
saying  that  the  sal  a  morena  wastes  in  a  minute 
would  last  a  blonde  a  week  and  a  half.  It  is  a 
good  thing  you  came  in  to-day;  Trinidad  is  cheer- 
ing up  already.  She  has  been  tremendously 
harried  —  had  a  visit  from  an  angry  parent  this 
morning,  and  a  visit  from  a  despairing  lover  last 
night.  He  stood  in  the  calle  outside  her  window, 
talking  with  her  till  past  twelve  o'clock.  You  see 
she's  en  deposito  with  Concepcion." 

At  this  moment  Concepcion  glided  across  the 
room  —  she  moved  with  that  peculiar  poetry  of 
motion  of  the  Spanish  woman  —  and  joined  us. 

"  Trinidad  is  very  distinguished,  no  ?  "  This 
was  always  her  highest  praise.  "  And  intelligent, 
and  instructed;  Ave  Maria  Purissima!  she  can 
speak  three  idioms." 

'  You  don't  understand  what  being  en  deposito 
means,"  Pemberton  went  on,  ignoring  the  in- 
terruption. "  Having  lately  come  of  age,  that  is 
eighteen  in  Andalusia,  Trinidad  made  application 
to  a  magistrate  by  means  of  an  official  document 
written  and  signed  by  herself  stating  that  she  wished 
to  marry  Jose  Maria  Benamiel;  that  her  parents, 
with  no  sufficient  reason,  forbade  the  marriage; 
that- 

"  Pobrecitos! "  broke  in  Concepcion;  "they 
have  been  making  love  these  four  years.  He  is  a 
youth  the  most  well-bred,  the  most  distin- 
guished   

'  Yesterday,"  Pemberton  continued,  "  the  mag- 
istrate called  on  Trinidad's  father  - 

"  He  came  in  a  carriage,"  Concepcion  reminded 
him. 

"  And  after  a  heated  interview,  took  Trinidad 
away  from  her  father's  house  and  brought  her  to 

I ours.     Here   she   will   stay   en  deposito   for  three 
months.  During  this  time,  Concepcion  is  re- 
sponsible for  her.  Trinidad  is  free  to  see  Bena- 
miel,  always  in  the  presence  of  some  responsible 
third  person,  and  her  parents  are  free  to  visit  her. 
They- 

'  They  are  people  the  most  egotistical,  the 
most  interested!  "  Concepcion  burst  out.  "  Can 
you  imagine?  they  denied  her  clothes,  por  Dios! 
it  is  the  truth:  that  is  my  dress  she  is  wearing! 
who  ever  heard  of  so  great  a  shame  ?  Not  one 
handkerchief  allowed  those  hard-hearted  ones  their 
daughter  to  take  away  from  their  accursed  house!  " 

"  It  is  true,  they  all  lost  their  tempers,"  said 
Pemberton  lightly,  "  and  behaved  foolishly.  I 
fancy  we  shall  see  a  portmanteau  before  night; 
between  ourselves,  Trinidad  might  very  well  have 
kept  on  the  dress  she  came  away  in  yesterday. 
It  is  not  a  bad  system,  the  deposito;  it  gives  time 
for  both  love  and  anger  to  cool  off.  The  girl  is 
out  of  coercion  here;  she  has  a  chance  to 
make  up  her  mind  whether  or  no  Benamiel  is 
really  the  man  for  her.  At  the  end  of  the  three 
months,  if  she  still  wants  him,  she  may  marry  him 
without  her  parents'  consent." 

"  Do  you  think  she  will  ?  " 

"  Pretty  safe  to.  The  old  people  will  give  in; 
there  is  nothing  really  against  Benamiel,  only  they 
preferred  O'Shea!   Small  blame  to  them.     O'Shea 

did  not  know  that  Trinidad  and  Benamiel  had 
already  settled  things  between  them.  When  he 
found  it  out  he  went  back  to  Cordova,  where  he  is 
stationed,  and,  Trinidad  says,  wanted  to  give  to 
Benamiel  a  bracelet  he  had  bought  for  her.  Nice 
boy,  O'Shea.  Why  is  it  that  the  nice  girls  always 
take  the  wrong  —  well,  there's  no  use  opening  that 
chapter,  if  you  must  be  going  —  it  is  time  for  your 
Spanish  lesson  —  we'll  tackle  it  some  other  time 
when  we  have  the  night  before  us!  " 

Don  Renaldo,  the  ex-ofeecial  de  marina,  was 
waiting  to  give  Patsy  and  me  our  lessons  in  vero 
Castellano.  His  method  was  simple;  he  talked, 
while  we  listened.  He  began  by  explaining  his 
rusty  mourning  suit,  as  he  drew  off  his  worn  old 
leather  gloves.  "It  is  the  thirtieth  anniversary 
of  the  death  of  my  father,"  he  spoke  slowly,  so  that 
we  might  follow  him.  "  All  the  masses  celebrated 
to-day  in  the  church  of  San  Sebastian  will  be 
applied  to  the  repose  of  his  soul."  Patsy  said  he 
would  like  to  hear  one  of  the  memorial  masses, 
but  it  was  already  too  late,  they  were  all  over. 

"  He  was  the  most  kind  of  fathers,  the  most 
benevolent  of  men,  his  benevolence  was  the  cause 
of  all  his  misfortunes  in  this  world!  To  oblige  a 
friend  he  signed  his  name  to  a  note,  understanding 
that  it  was  a  mere  form.     With  those*  two  strokes 
of  the  pen  he  signed  away  his  fortune." 

*  He  did  not  have  a  benevolent  friend!  "  Patsy 
ejaculated. 

"  Hombre!  He  was  a  caballero,  a  gentleman  of 
distinction — but — it  is  the  truth,  of  business  he  was 
as  ignorant  as  mi  pobre  papa!  The  catastrophe 
that  ruined  both,  killed  my  papa;  his  friend  died 
soon  after  of  shame.  Then  Tio  Jorge,  my  rich 
uncle,  took  me  and  brought  me  up  as  if  I  were  his 
heir.  Every  year  we  went  to  Paris  together;  we 
lived  with  great  elegance  on  the  Rue  de  Rivoli;  we 
had  a  box  at  the  opera;  I  had  my  own  carriage; 
my  clothes  came  from  Poole;  at  that  time  I  was 
very  elegant,  and  not,  people  said,  bad  looking. 
I  am  old  now,  but  then!  "  He  sighed  and  rolled 
up  his  eyes  at  the  recollection  of  his  elegant  youth. 

"  You're  not  old,  you're  in  the  prime  of  life," 
said  Patsy.  Though  Don  Renaldo  was  not  even 
elderly,  he  had  given  up  the  fight,  went  shabby 
and  unshaven,  with  buttons  missing  from  his 
frayed  shirt. 

"  Suddenly  Tio  Jorge  had  a  stroke  of  apoplexy,— 
I  was  at  Monte  Carlo  at  the  time.  I  hurried  to  his 
bedside  and  took  all  care  of  him  till  he  died.  It 
was  very  sad,  but  it  was  my  duty  to  see  everything 
done  as  he  would  have  wished.  His  funeral  was 
the  most  luxurious  ever  seen  in  Valladolid.  He 
was  followed  to  the  grave  by  the  aristocracy,  civil 
and  military  authorities,  and  whole  communities  of 
monks  and  nuns.  There  was  a  multitude  of 
carriages,  and  to  every  coachman  I  gave  a  propina 
of  fifty  pesetas.  After  the  funeral  the  will  was 
opened.  Well,  what  do  you  think  he  left  me  ?  " 

'  That  depends  upon  whether  or  not  you  were 
the  only  heir,"  Patsy  answered  soothingly. 

*  He  left  me  nothing!     Money,  palace,  horses, 
plate,  jewels,  everything  went  to  found  a  home  for 
the  widows  and  daughters  of  navy  officers !  the  pre- 
ference always  to  be  given  to  the  handsomest  ones. 
The  will  was  published;  there  followed  ridicule 
the  most  painful  from  half  the  papers  of  Europe, 
from  the  Argentine,  from  all  over  the  world.   They 
called  Tio  Jorge  a  modern  Don  Juan  Tenorio!  " 

*  The  old  hunks  deserved  something  worse  than 
to  be  laughed  at.     I  hope  he's  getting  it  now," 
murmured  Patsv. 

• 

*  May  be  —  but  that  was  not  true;  he  was  not 
an  immoral    man.     He    believed    that    beautiful 
ladies  had  greater  difficulties  to  contend  with  than 
others." 

'  He  might  have  left  you  a  life  interest,"  said 
Patsy;  "  the  beautiful  ladies  could  wait."  While 
Don  Renaldo  did  not  allow  himself  to  criticise  Tio 
Jorge,  our  sympathy  was  as  balm  to  him. 

"  I  gave  up  my  home,  I  gave  up  Paris  —  where  I 
was  too  well  known.  I  had  frequented  the  best 
society.  I  came  to  Seville  where  I  have  no  friends, 
where  many  travelers  come;  "  he  dropped  into 
English.  "  I  offre  my  service  to  accompany  and 
visit  monuments,  gib  lessons,  recommend  the 
hotels!  " 

"  Everybody  is  bothered  about  money  one  way 
or  the  other;  "  Patsy  tried  to  encourage  him;  "  as 
long  as  you  live,  you  either  have  got  to  earn  the 
money  you  spend,  or  spend  money  that  other  people 
have  earned.  Brace  up,  Amiga!  Think  how 
much  more  fun  it  is  to  earn  your  own  money  than 
to  spend  money  some  other  fellow  has  had  the  fun 
of  earning!  " 

Don  Renaldo  looked  steadily  at  him,  groping  for 
his  meaning.  "  At  first  I  envied  people  who  have 
money,"  he  confessed;  "  now  I  envy  those  who  have 
work  that  they  enjoy."  He  took  up  a  book  Patsy 
had  told  him  was  written  by  a  friend  of  ours. 
"  Your  friend  must  be  a  very  rich  man." 

"  He  just  makes  the  two  ends  meet  without 
lapping!  " 

"  How  could  he  afford  to  print  this  book  ?  The 
binding  is  elegant,  paper,  print  and  engravings, 
superior;  it  must  have  cost  a  great  deal!  " 

"  So  the  publishers  say." 

"  Ojald!    If  I  could  only  write." 

Poor,  pathetic  soul,  if  he  could  only  do  any  useful 
thing.  A  fortune  had  been  spent  on  his  education. 
He  could  ride  and  shoot  straight,  he  co;  ild  dance, 
and  fence,  and  play  every  game  under  the  sun, 
but  his  life  investment  yielded  a  small,  precarious 
income.  His  only  dividend-bearing  stock,  all  that 
stood  between  him  and  starvation,  was  a  passable 
knowledge  of  the  French  and  English  languages, 
part  of  the  accomplishments  of  his  elegant  youth. 

The  lesson  over,  Don  Renaldo  gone,  Patsy 
summed  up  his  case.  "  A  spent  shot!  "  he  said, 
"  a  poor  thing,  as  capable  of  taking  care  of  himself 
as  a  year  old  baby;  more  coals  to  Tio  Jorge!  " 

One  happy  day,  when  we  had  almost  given  up 
hope  of  ever  seeing  him  again,  Don  Jaime  strolled 
jauntily  into  the  patio,  his  sombrero  gallantly 
cocked  on  one  side,  his  worn  coat  carefully  brushed, 
his  trousers  newly  creased,  a  bunch  of  violets  in  his 
buttonhole.  He  was  greeted  with  shrieks  and 
screams  of  joy.  Black  coffee  and  un  poco  de 
ginevra  de  campagna  (his  only  vices)  were  im- 
mediately ordered  for  him. 

"  I  arrive  only  at  middle  night  yesterday,"  he 
said,  when  accused  of  desertion.  "  I  have  made  a 
loose,  my  brother-in-law,  he  is  daid."  Patsy  asked 
if  it  was  the  husband  of  his  sister  who  had  died. 

"  Ah,  no!  brother  to  my  woman.  Me,  my 
father,  my  grandfather  were  all  unique  childs;  I 
have  no  sister  —  only  a  half  a  sister,  Candalaria, 
—  no  brother,  no  honkle,  no  haunt;  I  am  a  widow 
and  a  horphan."  We  expressed  sympathy  for  his 
loss.  The  Don  assured  us  that  his  brother-in-law's 
death  was  a  release. 

"Poor  man!  he  was  secluded  in  —  how  you 
say  ?  an  insanitorium  these  long  years.  When  he 
was  daid,  he  had  himself  embaumed  and  trans- 
ported to  Cadiz,  where  is  the  pantheon  of  himself 
and  his  wife." 

"  We  were  just  starting  to  drive  to  Italica," 
said  J.  '  You'll  go  with  us,  Don  ?  Where's  your 
capa?  You'll  need  it;  it's  cold  this  afternoon." 

"  Ah,  no !  I  am  warm  inside,  since  I  drinked  the 
ginevra"  he  patted  his  stomach.  "  Ah  well,  it  is 
heatier  in  Sevilla  than  in  Cadiz,  where  I  goed  to 
escort  the  catafalque  of  my  brother." 

After  that  J.  and  Patsy  took  the  Don  away  from 
me,  and  all  that  afternoon  they  kept  him  to  them- 
selves. I  followed  in  another  carriage  with  Pem- 
berton.  Bursts  of  riotous  laughter  came  to  us  from 
their  cab,  as  they  passed  us  on  the  Alameda  of 
Hercules.  At  the  foot  of  that  pleasant,  shady 
mall,  our  coachman  drew  up  under  a  pair  of  tall, 
gray  granite  columns. 

"  The  old  columns  are  from  a  Roman  temple," 
said  Pemberton.  "  These  guardians  of  the  town," 
he  pointed  to  the  battered  old  statue  that  stood 
on  either  column,  "  are  Hercules  the  founder,  and 
Julius  Caesar  the  second  founder  of  Seville.  Oh, 
yes!  Hercules  was  here;  he  stopped  and  rested  by 
the  river,  and  founded  Seville  that  time  he  wan- 
dered through  the  Peninsula,  driving  the  lowing 
herds  of  Geyron  before  him." 

We  had  crossed  the  tawny  Guadalquiver,  and 
were  driving  through  Triano,  the  potters'  suburb, 
named  for  the  Emperor  Trajan.  An  open  door- 
way gave  us  a  glimpse  of  a  man  working  a  wheel 
with  his  feet,  and  holding  a  newly  moulded  clay 
vase  in  his  hands  against  the  swiftly  turning  wheel. 

*  They  still  make  the  azulejos,  and  the  pottery 
in  Seville,  as  they  did  in  the  days  of  the  Moors  - 
how  do  I  know  ?  In  the  days  of  the  Romans !  Re- 
member, when  you  come  to  build  your  house,  that 
the  tiles  of  Triano  are  the  best,  cheapest,  and  hand- 
somest in  the  world;  that  Seville  is  a  port;  and  that 
they  can  be  shipped  to  you  at  a  fair  price.  Shall 
we  stop  at  the  factory  and  see  them  ?  The  place 
supplies  the  whole  of  Spain  with  crockery.  Patsy 
would  fall  in  love  with  the  big  garden  pots,  and  the 
pretty  jugs." 

The  most  interesting  thing  we  saw  in  the 
factory  was  the  potter  himself.  Behind  the  splen- 
did showrooms,  where  the  fine  majolicas  and 
the  common  wares  of  the  common  people  are 
displayed,  in  a  dark,  dank  little  corner,  sat  a 
man,  half  his  body  out  of  sight,  working  the  potter's 
wheel.  He  sat  on  the  edge  of  a  square  hole  in 
the  floor;  his  legs  were  hidden,  but  his  feet  were 
busy  turning,  turning  the  wheel.  He  was  old  and 
poor.  His  red  hands  had  been  in  the  wet  clay  who 
knows  how  many  hours  —  how  many  days  ?  He 
was  spiritless  and  sad  in  face  and  bearing,  but 
oh!  the  skill  of  those  poor  red  hands!  The 
shapeless  lump  of  soft  wet  clay  was  thumped 
first  upon  the  revolving  stand,  then  as  if  by  magic, 
though  we  saw  it  with  our  eyes,  it  took  shape,  grew 
lovely  and  alive  under  those  hands  that  looked  so 
sodden,  and  yet  could  turn  that  gray  mud  into 
shapes  of  beauty.  A  cup  for  a  dying  man's  broth, 
a  vase  for  a  bride's  rose,  a  basin  to  bathe  a  new- 
born child :  as  each  was  finished  he  held  it  up  for 
a  moment  for  us  to  see,  then  laid  it  down  beside 
him  with  the  others.  I  put  a  coin  in  the  red, 
clayey  hand.  He  gave  a  little  mechanical  nod,  a 
word  of  thanks,  and  went  back  to  his  work.  He 
earns  less  than  an  unskilled  child  would  earn  at 
home.  It  is  doubtful  if  he  can  read  or  write. 
He  works  from  dawn  to  dark  —  the  sight  of 
him  gave  me  great  pangs  of  homesickness  !  Pem- 
berton  could  tell  me  of  no  movement  to  help  this 
man  to  a  freer  life,  to  a  day  whose  working  hours 
do  not  absorb  every  heartbeat  of  power.  There  is 
only  charity!  Bread  for  the  hungry,  salve  for  the 
sick,  almshouse  for  the  worked-out  human  beast  of 
burden.  Oh !  that  I  could  help  him  to  pass  through 
the  Gate  of  Hope  into  the  Hospitable  Land,  where 
every  one  has  his  chance,  where  the  ranks  are 
always  open. 

Triano  was  already  behind  us,  and  we  were  out 
upon  the  Aracena  road  that  runs  to  the  north. 
Tramp,  tramp,  tramp,  the  sound  of  marching  men 
came  towards  us  out  of  a  cloud  of  dust.  A  little  far- 
ther on  we  passed  a  regiment  of  small  brown  soldiers; 
mere  boys,  most  of  them.  They  all  wore  sandals; 
some  had  stockings,  some  were  without.  They 
must  have  been  on  fatiguing  work,  they  looked  so 
tired  and  footsore.  In  the  fields,  a  band  of  peasants 
were  cutting  the  ruby  alfalfa;  the  air  was  fragrant 
with  the  honey-sweet  smell  of  it.  The  harsh  whet- 
ting of  scythes,  the  soft  swish  of  sickles  through  the 
clover,  the  song  of  the  leader  of  the  mowers,  an 
oldish  man  with  a  red  handkerchief  tied  round  his 
head,  marked  the  time  for  the  march  of  those  weary 
soldiers, 

Adu>s  padre,  y  adios  madre,  Goodbye  father  and  mother; 
adios  iglesia  del  pueblo,  Goodbye  church  of  the  village. 

que  voy  d  servir  al  rey  I  must  go  and  serve  the  king 

los  ochos  anos  que  lo  debo.         For  the  eight  years  that  I  owe 

him. 

One  of  the  last  of  the  soldiers,  a  superb  blond 
man  towering  above  the  others,  repeated  the  re- 
frain of  the  mower's  song: 

"I  must  go  and  serve  the  king  for  the  eight  years  that  I  owe 
him!" 

"Nothing  has  changed  since  Strabo  praised  this 
pleasant  valley,"  said  Pemberton.  "We  still  use 
sickles,  and  we  still  take  the  young  men  from  the 
work  of  the  fields,  and  turn  them  into  soldiers,  food 
for  gunpowder." 

Coming  mysteriously  towards  us,  down  the 
straight  white  road,  were  half  a  dozen  little  moving 
heaps  of  newly  cut  clove*.  We  could  not  see,  until 
they  were  upon  us,  the  legs  of  the  tiny  donkey  trot- 
ting along  under  each  fragrant  load. 

"In  Greece,"  said  Pemberton,  "when  they  want 
to  say  a  man  is  a  clever,  long-headed  chap,  they 
call  him  an  ass.  Of  all  asses,  the  Spanish  is  the 
wisest.  The  peasants  work  them  hard,  abuse  them 
a  little,  but  they  love  them  and  treat  them  like 
members  of  the  family;  that  is  why  they  are  so  in- 
telligent." 

We  were  passing  through  gray  olive  groves,  be- 
tween fields  of  emerald  wheat:  golden  butterflies 
hovered  about  the  wild  lavender  growing  by  the 
wayside.  Here  and  there,  peeping  from  orchard 
and  ploughed  field,  were  bits  of  ruins,  all 
that  is  left  of  the  once  splendid  forum,  the  temples 
and  palaces  of  the  old  Roman  city  of  Italica.  At 
the  guardian's  hfft,  where  we  stopped  to  inquire 
the  way  to  the  circus,  we  saw  a  few  poor  antiquities, 
some  Roman  lamps  and  fragments  of  sculpture. 
The  guardian  was  absent,  and  we  looked  in  vain 
for  a  trace  of  the  fine  Roman  mosaic  pavement  dis- 
covered a  hundred  years  ago,  of  which  we  had  heard. 
A  poor  monk,  Fray  Jose  Moscoso,  built  a  wall 
round  it,  hoping  to  preserve  the  precious  thing, 
but  Soult's  French  soldiers  destroyed  it  by  turning 
the  enclosure  into  a  goat  pen.  There  is  an  engrav- 
ing of  this  mosaic  in  the  Biblioteca  Columbina  at 
Seville.  When  the  archaeologists  come  to  Spain, — 
or  rather  when  the  Spanish  archaeologists  carry 
their  work  farther,  —  there  will  be  a  rich  treasure 
trove.  Very  little  scientific  excavation  has  been 
undertaken  yet.  The  soil,  so  rich  in  archaeological 
as  well  as  in  mineral  and  agricultural  wealth,  has 
hardly  been  scratched.  That  is  one  of  the  interest- 
ing things  about  Spain,  —  it  has  still  so  much  to  do. 
With  all  its  wonderful,  romantic  past,  it  is  still  a 
young  country,  with  a  great  future  before  it.  The 
Spaniards  have  been  so  busy  keeping  the  East  out 
of  the  West,  fighting  the  battles  of  other  nations, 
keeping  those  wretched  Bourbons  on  the  thrones  of 
Italy  where  they  were  not  wanted,  opening  up  the 
New  World  and  making  Spanish  America,  that 
they  have  neglected  Spain.  That  was  yesterday. 
To-day  all  is  changed.  Spain  has  pulled  on  the 
seven-league  boots  of  the  giant  Progress,  and  is 
striding  manfully  ahead,  making  up  for  lost  time. 

It  is  easy  enough  to  turn  one's  back  upon  the 
great  army  of  ghosts  at  Seville  in  Fair  time,  when  life 
is  at  the  flood  and  the  pulses  leap  with  the  thrill  of 
it;  in  Sevilla  Vieja,  the  old  Roman  city  of  Italica, 
it  can't  be  done.  Here  are  none  but  ghosts,  and  one 
old  gabaloonzy  man  who  acts,  in  the  absence  of  the 
true  guardian,  as  our  guide;  he  is  a  shepherd  and 
his  sheep  crop  the  grass  that  grows  over  Italica. 
He  stopped  his  knitting  to  pick  a  wild  orchid  rooted 
into  the  crumbling  arch  of  the  old  Roman  amphi- 
theatre. 

"Mire,"  he  said;  "this  is  the  bee  flower.  Can 
you  see  the  bee?" 

His  needles  clicked  again,  the  only  sound  in  the 
great  circus  save  the  noise  of  the  sheep  cropping  the 
grass  of  the  arena.  In  and  out  of  the  crimson  alfalfa 
and  the  wild  thyme,  buzzed  the  wild  bees  gathering 
honey.  They  made  a  soft  humming,  at  first  con- 
fused, then  growing  clearer  and  clearer,  till  the  faint 
hints  of  meaning  in  their  song  seemed  to  grow 
into  words: 

"Scipio  Africanus  founded  me,"  sang  the  bees, 
speaking  for  Italica,  "as  a  refuge  for  his  veterans 
after  the  great  war  with  Carthage." 

Out   of   the  shadowy  archway  leading  to  the 
wild  beast  dens,  a  stronger  shadow  fell  on  the 
grass.  Here,  in  the  city  his  love  and  care  estab- 
lished for  the  old  soldiers  who  followed  him  to 
victory  and  immortal  glory,  I  saw  magnanimous 
Scipio,  and  at  his  side,  a  fainter  pair,  Allutius  the 
Celtiberian  prince,  with  the  fair  woman  both  men 
loved,  and  whom  the  Roman,  when  he  learned  that 
she  was  affianced  to  Allutius,  renounced,  refusing 
all  ransom,  and  asking  as  his  only  recompense 
the  friendship  of  Allutius  for  the  Republic.  It 
was  not  stranger  than  all  the  rest  that  the  shade 
of  the  bride  looked  like  Trinidad. 

"Three  Emperors  I  gave  to  Rome, -- Trajan, 
Hadrian,  Theodosius!"  ran  the  song  of  the  bees, 
speaking  for  Italica  forsaken. 

Trajan  —  the  good  emperor  of  whom  Rome  still 
gossips  and  has  so  little  harm  to  say  ?  Why,  it  was 
only  the  other  day  that  standing  by  your  tomb  in 
the  Eternal  City,  in  your  forum,  in  the  shadow  of 
the  great  column  that  bears  the  record  of  your  tri- 
umphs, I  heard  the  old  story,  told  and  retold  by 
poet,  painter  and  sculptor;  how  clear  it  echoes 
through  the  ages!  As  you  rode  forth  to  battle,  a 
poor  widow  stood  at  your  bridle  and  would  not  let 
you  pass,  crying  out  for  justice  for  her  son,  whom 
your  soldiers  had  ridden  down  and  killed,  inno- 
cent of  ill.  You  stopped  on  your  triumphant  way 
and  gave  that  justice  the  poor  woman  cried  out 
for,  then  rode  on  to  victory.  Five  centuries  after 
your  death,  in  the  time  of  Pope  Gregory  the  Great, 
your  skull  was  found,  with  the  tongue  still  alive,  so 
the  great  Gregory  was  able  to  hold  parley  with 
you. 

"Trajan!  Trajan!  Where  art  thou?"  cried 
Gregory. 

"In  hell,"  answered  the  Emperor. 

"Why  art  thou  in  hell?" 

"Because  I  was  not  baptized!" 

At  hearing  this  the  grief  of  Gregory  was  so  great 
that  he  went  into  the  old  church  of  St.  Peter,  and 
wept  for  Trajan  in  hell.  And  the  tears  of  Pope 
Gregory  fell  down  into  hell,  and  quenched  the 
flames  of  Trajan's  torment. 

I  tell  the  tale  as  it  was  told  to  me  by  Giacomo 
Boni,  at  the  foot  of  Trajan's  column  in  the  city  of 
Rome.  The  spirit  of  Trajan  has  laid  hold  of  Boni, 
even  as  it  laid  hold  of  the  great  Gregory,  and  he, 
too,  arises  to  demand  for  Trajan  the  Just  the  tribute 
of  our  love. 

When  the  others  came  back,  I  told  Pember- 
ton  what  had  happened  in  the  old  circus,  while  they 
had  been  hunting  for  the  forum  of  Ubs  Italica. 

:* You'll  find  us  dull  company  after  such!"  he 
laughed.  "  Visits  from  Scipio  Africanus  and  Trajan 
are  more  exciting  than  one's  neighbors,  and  much 
more  easily  returned." 

"The  trouble  is  such  friendships  are  so  one- 
sided!" Patsy  objected.  "What  can  I  do  for 
Marcus  Aurelius  ?  The  greatest  Spaniard  of  them 
all.  He  has  done  so  much  for  me.  His  *  Medita- 
tions '  made  me  think  for  the  first  time  in  my  life.'* 

"Haven't  you  learned  yet  that  you  can  never 
return  a  real  benefit  to  the  person  who  con- 
ferred it  ?  You  can  only  hand  it  on,  pay  the  debt  to 
the  first  needy  person  you  meet.  Are  we  not  all 
debtors  to  Greeks  and  Barbarians?  All  we  can 
ever  do  for  the  dead  is  to  keep  their  names  from 
dying;  and,  what  is  so  much  more  important,  keep 
alive  the  flame  that  was  in  them,  kindle  other  souls 
as  they  kindled  yours.  The  fire  Prometheus  stole 
from  heaven  never  goes  out;  it  is  carried  from  soul 
to  soul  as  one  torch  is  kindled  from  another,  till  the  > 
whole  earth  shall  be  lighted  and  no  dark  places  left. 
The  shame  of  shames  is  to  have  received  that  fire, 
and  let  the  flame  of  it  go  out  in  you!" 

A  peasant  man  and  woman,  evidently  strangers, 
strayed  into  the  arena,  and  stood  staring  at  the 
moss-covered  stones.  The  man,  a  decent  fellow 
with  a  pleasant  smile  and  no  teeth,  greeted  the  knit- 
ting shepherd. 

"This  perhaps  is  the  ruin  of  some  great  palace  ?" 
he  said. 

"It  is  the  bull-ring,"  the  shepherd  corrected, 
"they  say  there  was  a  city  here  once;  you  can  see 
where  the  streets  were;  there  are  also  bits  of  old 
churches  and  houses." 

"Valgame  Dios!"  exclaimed  the  stranger,  "per- 
haps this  was  an  important  town,  before  it  was 
ruined  a  hundred  years  ago  or  more!" 

"JVo  se  sabe"  said  the  shepherd  indifferently. 
He  called  his  dog,  who  began  to  herd  the  sheep, 
running  round  and  round  them  in  a  circle  and  bark- 
ing furiously.  The  sun  was  westering;  it  lacked 
but  an  hour  of  setting;  we  were  five  miles  from  our 
dinner,  and  reluctantly  we  turned  our  backs  on 
Italica,  the  buried  city,  with  its  twice  ten  hundred 
years,  and  drove  back  to  Seville. 

"It  is  a  pestilential  trait, —  this  pulling  down  old 
cities  to  build  new;"  said  Pemberton,  as  we  drove 
through  the  wretched  village  of  Santiponce. 
"They  pulled  down  Italica  to  get  building  material 
for  Seville.  Only  the  other  day,  hardly  more 
than  a  hundred  years  ago,  they  took  some  of 
the  stone  of  the  old  circus  to  make  the  road  to 
Badajos.  Men  build  cities  as  birds  build  nests; 
not  many  birds  are  satisfied  with  last  year's  nests, 
not  many  men  with  other  men's  cities." 

"Have  you  heard,"  called  Patsy  from  the  other 
carriage,  as  with  derisive  hoots  they  passed  us  on 
the  old  Roman  road,  "Don  Jaime  goes  with  us  to 
Cordova." 

"As  you  please,"  said  the  Don;  "or  take  ship  and 
make  a  little  crusade  in  the  Mediterranean,  —  to 
Morocco,  if  you  will." 

The  next  day  we  left  Seville,  stopping  on  the  way 
to  the  station  for  a  last  look  at  the  cathedral.  We 
entered  by  way  of  the  Court  of  Oranges,  paused  be- 
neath the  orange  trees  laden  with  fruit  and  blos- 
soms, and  drew  long  breaths  of  the  delicious  fra- 
grance. Here  Concepcion  and  Trinidad  joined 
us.  Both  wore  the  mantilla,  still  de  rigeur  for  early 
mass.  Concepcion  had  a  yellow  rose  in  her  curls 
to  match  her  fan.  Trinidad  carried  a  bunch  of 
white  rosebuds;  she  was  wearing  her  own  dress  to- 
day ;  it  showed  the  curves  of  beauty  better  than  that 
loose  frock  of  Concepcion's !  Both  young  women 
looked  fresh  as  roses  with  the  night  dew  still  on 
them,  and  smelt  pleasantly  of  orange-flower  water. 
As  we  stood  gossiping  by  the  old  fountain,  a  pretty 
altar  boy  in  white  and  scarlet  finery  came  towards  us, 
swinging  a  gold  censer  to  keep  the  coals  alight.  As 
he  passed  he  looked  at  Trinidad,  and  seemed  to 
swing  the  censer  towards  her :  for  a  moment  we  saw 
her  in  a  cloud  of  blue  incense  smoke. 

We  made  the  tour  of  the  cathedral,  and  took  leave 
of  Murillo's  Guardian  Angel  and  his  San  Antonio. 
A  shaft  of  sunlight  carried  the  stain  of  the  painted 
glass,  ruby,  topaz,  emerald,  to  the  columns  under 
the  round  window  of  the  Assumption.  The  golden 
mass  bells  tinkled;  they  were  saying  mass  in  the 
chapel  royal  before  the  silver  altar  where  Saint  Fer- 
dinand is  buried.  Alive,  he  was  King  Ferdinand 
III;  dead,  he  became  a  saint,  because  with  his  own 
hands  he  had  carried  fagots  to  burn  heretics.  A 
sound  of  hammers  echoed  through  the  great  cathe- 
dral. 

"The  fiestas  are  over,"  said  Pemberton;  "they 
are  taking  down  the  monument  over  the  tomb  of 
Ferdinand  Columbus." 

As  we  passed  out  through  the  Puerta  del  Lagarte 
under  the  great  crocodile,  the  twin  organs  thun- 
dered, the  choir  sang  a  deep  "Amen,"  the  bells  in 
the  Giralda  clanged  a  parting  peal. 

"Heavens!"  murmured  Patsy,  as  from  the  train 
window  we  looked  back  at  the  darling  of  Andalusia, 
lying  in  the  fold  of  Guadalquiver's  arm,  "  what  a 
beautiful  world  this  is!"  He  blinked  as  he  said 
it,  as  if  there  were  tears  in  his  eyes. 

"  Quien  no  ha  vista  Sevilla, 
no  ha  vista  maravilla." 


Chapter VII. CORDOVA 

Other  towns  may  be  better  to  live  in.      None  are  better  to 
be  born  in  than  Cordova. — EL  GRAN  CAPITAN 

THE  old  Roman  engineer  who  built  Cordova 
Bridge  did  a  good  piece  of  work,"  said 
Patsy.  "See,  those  are  his  foundations;  they  are 
solid  still, —  it  is  a  good  bridge  yet !  The  arches  are 
paltry,  modern  things  beside  them;  they  were  put 
up  centuries  later  by  a  Moor  called  As-Sahn.  It 
does  not  seem  fair  that  his  name  should  be  remem- 
bered, and  the  Roman's  forgotten." 

The  Roman's  work  is  not  forgotten,  and  will  not  be, 
while  Cordova  Bridge  stands,  and  while  the  city  arms 
remain  a  bridge  on  water.  The  weeds  push  between 
the  great  stones,  a  lovely  enamel  of  orange  lichen 
covers  the  staunch  old  piers,  around  which  the  am- 
ber Guadalquiver  laps  and  murmurs.  The  white 
highroad  follows  the  river  south  to  Seville;  the  way 
north  is  barred  by  a  range  of  purple  Sierras. 

Not  even  in  Italica  is  the  mark  of  Rome  stronger 
than  in  Cordova;  the  old  bridge,  the  names  of  the 
streets,  the  memories  of  the  famous  Roman  citizens 
who  were  born  here,  bring  imperial  Rome  to  mind 
at  every  moment.  The  Romans  came  to  Cordova 
as  conquerors  carrying  the  eagles  through  Spain;  they 
made  the  city  the  capital  of  Hispania  Ulterior,  and 
called  it  the  Patrician  Colony  because  so  many  of 
the  Romans  who  settled  here  and  married  the  grace- 
ful, dark-eyed  Cordovese  women  were  of  patrician 
descent.  The  Roman  rule,  harsh  at  first,  grew  gen- 
tler, for  while  Rome  ruled,  Christianity  came  to  Cor- 
dova, and  pagan  slavery  softened  to  a  milder  form 
of  vassalage. 

"A  man  can  do  one  of  two  things  with  his  life," 
Patsy  philosophized,  "Build  it  all  up  into  a  mon- 
ument to  his  own  memory,  or  lay  it  down  in  paving 
stones  —  or  a  bridge  —  for  other  people  to  walk 
over.  Which  is  the  best  worth  while  ?  As  if  one 
could  choose ! "  He  dropped  a  stone  into  the  water, 
and  watched  the  circles  spread  into  larger  and 
larger  rings. 

We  had  arrived  at  Cordova  too  late  to  see  the 
Mosque,  and  had  come  directly  from  the  station  to 
the  bridge  to  watch  the  thin  current  of  life  and 
traffic  pulsing  in  and  out  of  the  dead  alive  old  town. 
There  is  no  place  like  a  bridge  for  gathering  impres- 
sions of  a  strange  city. 

"He  he,  Macho!"  an  old  muleteer  with  gold 
earrings  threw  a  stone  at  the  brown  mule,  leader  of 
his  team,  just  in  time  to  prevent  his  running  into  a 
donkey  that  was  crossing  the  bridge  in  the  other 
direction,  laden  with  paniers  full  of  terra  cotta  jars. 
Before  the  mule  train  had  disappeared,  we  heard  a 
great  clatter  and  rattling  of  loose  screws  and  rivets, 
as  an  old  chaise  came  lumbering  along  the  white 
highroad  from  the  direction  of  Seville,  and  stopped 
at  the  bridge  gate.  The  custom-house  officer,  doz- 
ing on  his  bench,  woke  up,  and  asked  the  usual  tire- 
some question. 

"Have  their  Graces  anything  to  declare?" 

The  gentleman  Grace,  apparently  deaf,  behaved 
as  if  he  had  neither  seen  nor  heard  the  officer,  and 
had  only  stopped  to  flick  a  horsefly  from  his  fat 
white  mare.  The  lady  Grace  shook  her  silver 
curls. 

"  No,  nothing  to  declare,"  she  said. 

Strapped  to  the  back  of  the  chaise  was  a  cylin- 
drical, horsehair  trunk,  studded  with  brass  nails. 

* '  What  might  this  contain  ? ' '  The  officer  touched 
the  trunk. 

"Only  our  garments;  we  have  been  spending  a 
week  at  the  hacienda." 

"Open  it,  please.     How  is  this,  a  ham  ?" 

"  Our  own.  The  tax  was  paid  when  the  pig  was 
killed;  twelve  pesetas.  It  was  far  too  much." 

"That  is  another  matter.     You  must  pay  the  tax 
on  provisions  brought  into  the  city  as  well."  The 
officer  weighed  the  ham,  and  began  to  make  a  calcu- 
lation with  pencil  and  note-book.  "  There  is  also 
to  be  added  the  fine  for  not  having  declared  the 
ham." 

The  lady's  eye*  snapped  angrily,  as  she  gave  the 
officer  a  piece  of  her  mind.  ;<  You  are  a  miserable 
loafer!  It  is  to  pay  salaries  to  such  lazy  fellows  as 
you  that  honest  people  are  robbed  of  their  honest 
money!" 

It  was  growing  late.  By  the  time  the  ham  was 
settled  for,  the  vivid  blue  of  the  western  sky  had 
turned  soft  apple-green.  We  climbed  a  crazy 
stair  to  the  window  of  the  gate,  to  avoid  a  drove  of 
cattle  driven  across  the  bridge  by  a  vaquero  in  a 
brown  capote.  .The  comfortable  smell  of  kine  came 
in  at  the  window.  On  the  other  side  of  the  Guadal- 
quiver,  in  the  golden  haze  of  dust  kicked  up  by  those 
silly,  helter-skeltering  cows,  lay  Cordova.  Before 
us  rose  the  great  Mosque;  in  the  centre  the  tower- 
ing masonry  of  the  Christian  Cathedral  stood  out 
in  bold  outline  against  the  distant  Sierra.  The  sun 
set  quietly  in  the  quiet  sky;  a  few  minutes  after,  the 
whole  heaven  was  aflame  with  the  glorious  crimson 
after-glow;  the  river  ran  red;  the  whole  earth  shone 
with  the  reflection.  The  sunset  was  like  the  death 
of  some  great  and  unsuspected  saint,  some  humble 
man,  the  glory  of  whose  life  is  only  known  when 
he  has  gone  and  the  whole  world  is  filled  with  the 
o 
light  of  the  soul  that  has  just  passed  from  it. 
"The  moon  will  soon  be  up,"  said  Patsy.  "Let 
us  wait  for  it.  We  are  not  likely  to  see  sunset  and 
moonrise  from  Cordova  bridge  again." 

The  custom-house  officer  madfe  room  for  us  on 
his  wooden  bench.  As  we  sat  watching  the  swal- 
lows flit  back  and  forth  over  the  river,  Patsy  told  us 
stories  about  the  great  men  who  had  lived  at  Cor- 
dova, and  we  all  made  believe  we  saw  them  cross 
the  old  bridge.  A  tall  military  man  with  a  clank- 
ing sword  passed  through  the  gate. 

'There  goes  Marcellus,  the  Tribune  who  con- 
quered Cordova  for  Rome;  our  friend  the  engineer 
must  have  come  here  soon  after  him;  isn't  it  a  pity 
we  can't  find  his  name,  when  such  silly  ones  are 
remembered?" 

"He  built  a  good  bridge;  does  it  matter  whether 
he  was  called  Caius  or  Cassius  ?" 

"Why,  yes,  it  matters  to  me,"  Patsy  persisted. 
"There  was  another  Marcellus  who  came  to  Cor- 
dova later,  in  Julius  Caesar's  time.  How  talent 
runs  in  families!  Caesar  sent  him  to  rebuild  the 
town  after  he  had  half  destroyed  it  for  taking 
Pompey's  side  in  that  old  quarrel  we  boys  used  to 
fight  over  again  at  school.  The  Senecas  came  from 
here,  too;  there  is  a  square  named  for  them.  You 
remember  the  story  about  Seneca's  wife?  When 
Nero  sent  word  that  Seneca  must  die,  both  he  and 
his  wife  opened  the  veins  in  their  arms.  Seneca, 
who  was  much  older  than  his  wife,  died  first,  where- 
upon Madam's  women  bound  up  her  veins,  and  she 
lived  several  years  after.  There  was  talent  in  that 
family,  too;  the  father  was  a  writer,  and  Lucan, 
the  poet,  was  either  a  cousin  or  nephew.  Hullo! 
Look  at  the  folds  of  that  old  beggar's  capa;  doesn't 
it  look  like  a  toga  ?  Now  remember  that  cantanker- 
ous face  of  Seneca's  in  the  bust  at  the  Naples 
Museum,  and  if  you  can't  see  Nero's  tutor  potter- 
ing over  that  old  bridge  you've  no  imagination!  " 

The  swallows  had  all  gone  to  their  nests;  the 
soft,  fumbling  flight  of  a  pair  of  small  bats  wove  a 
pattern  against  the  fading  sky. 

"That  portly  gentleman  on  the  white  mule 
might  well  be  Hosius,  one  time  Bishop  of  Cordova. 
You  never  heard  of  him,  perhaps,  but  you  must 
have  heard  of  the  Nicene  Creed,"  Patsy  went  on. 
It  was  evident  that  we  had  to  listen  to  all  he  knew 
about  Cordova. 

"The  next  time  you  hear  that  creed  repeated, 
remember  Hosius,  Bishop  here  in  Cordova  for  sixty- 
three  years;  he  presided  at  the  Council  of  Nicea 
when  the  creed  was  made.  That  was  after  he  had 
failed  in  the  task  Constantine  set  him  of  persuading 
Arius  to  give  up  the  Unitarian  heresy.  Think  how 
often  he  must  have  ambled  over  this  old  bridge." 

It  always  has  been  hard  to  persuade  people  to 
give  up  the  Unitarian  heresy !  Whenever  I  hear  the 
Nicene  creed,  I  shall  think  of  Bishop  Hosius  whom, 
that  night  of  nights,  we  saw  ride  across  the  old  Ro- 
man bridge  at  Cordova  on  a  white  mule. 

"The  one  I  should  like  best  to  have  known  of  all 
the  great  men  who  ever  lived  at  Cordova  was  the 
Caliph  Abd-er-Rahman.  What  a  man  he  was! 
Servant  of  the  compassionate,  they  called  him. 
That  is  his  Mosque,  those  are  his  palms ;  he  planted 
the  great-grandfathers  of  those  trees  with  his  own 
hand.  If  you  could  make  Seneca's  toga  out  of  that 
old  beggar's  capa,  can't  you  see  Abd-er-Rahman's 
bournous  in  that  young  fellow's  cloak  ?  He  is  as 
dark  as  an  Arab;  the  red  handkerchief  knotted 
round  his  head  under  the  sombrero  makes  a  decent 
turban.  He  has  the  swagger  of  a  torrero.  Con- 
queror of  bulls,  conqueror  of  men,  where  is  the  dif- 
ference ?  Toga,  bournous,  capa,  —  all  three  gar- 
ments are  practically  the  same." 

"What  do  you  suppose  Gonsalvo  de  Cordova, 
El  Gran  Capitan  wore?" 

"A  cloak  like  the  rest  of  them,  I  fancy.  There 
are  a  great  many  things  named  for  him  in  the  city 
over  there :  a  theatre,  a  paseo,  I  don't  know  what 
else.  In  poetry  they  call  him  the  Scourge  of  Islam. 
When  I  showed  Don  Jaime  a  rather  steep  bill,  he 
whistled,  and  said  'They  have  made  you  out  the 
account  of  el  Gran  Capitan.'  The  size  of  the  bills 
he  presented  to  Ferdinand  and  Isabel  for  scourging 
the  infidel  is  the  thing  he  is  best  remembered  for  in 
Cordova." 

"  That's  gossip ;  history  says  he  really  was  a  great 
captain,"  I  protested. 

"According  to  the  proverb,  it  is  the  blooo^of  the 
soldier  makes  the  great  captain,"  said  Patsy.  "As 
to  history,  Martial  says;  — '  Givelip  frivolous  fable 
and  read  history ! '  He  also  says,  *  Fool  that  I  was ! 
Why  did  I  not  follow  the  advice  I  gave  Mamura  ?' 
But,  truly,  isn't  to-day's  gossip,  to-morrow's 
history?" 

"To-morrow's  history  will  be  rheumatism  if  we 
stay  mooning  here  any  longer,"  J.  said  firmly. 
" Right  about  face,  homeward,  march!" 

After  dinner,  as  he  sat  writing  postal  cards  to  be 
despatched  to  the  four  corners  of  the  earth,  Patsy 
made  acquaintance,  over  the  inkstand,  with  the 
Argentine.  He  was  a  tall  man  with  a  close-cut, 
pointed  beard  that  had  been  gold  and  would  soon 
be  silver,  and  fiery  brown  eyes  that  would  always  be 
young. 

"So  you  are  an  American,  too?"  I  heard  him 
say  to  Patsy.  "  Are  you  from  the  States  ?" 

"Yes;  I  took  you  for  a  Spaniard." 

"No,  I  am  an  American  from  the  Argentine." 

We  left  Patsy  and  the  stranger  plunged  in  talk. 

Half  an  hour  later,  Patsy  brought  his  new  acquaint- 
ance to  our  room. 

"It's  raining  so  hard  we  can't  go  out,"  he  whis- 
pered; "this  is  the  most  comfortable  place  in  the 
house  —  he  is  a  kind  of  an  American  — 

"  This  is  *  a  good  Son  of  the  Way/  that  is  what  the 
Arabs,call  a  traveller,"  said  the  Argentine,  looking 
at  Patsy.  "  He  makes  a  friend  as  a  sailor  makes  a 
sweetheart,  between  tides,  waiting  for  his  ship  to 
sail." 

It  was  pouring  now.  Beside  the  noise  of  the  rain 
on  the  roof  we  heard,  every  now  and  then,  a  strange 
sobbing  sigh. 

"  Grrr !  Isn't  that  a  creepy  noise  ?  If  I  were  not 
broad  awake  and  looking  at  you  all  by  electric  light, 
I  should  believe  those  were  the  ghosts  of  the  great 
men  of  Cordova  lamenting  the  departed  glory  of 
their  city." 

"I  wish  they  were,"  said  the  Argentino.  "They 
could  tell  me  just  where  the  old  Iberian  village 
stood,  when  the  Phoenicians  came  punting  up  the 
river  and  discovered  it,  just  as  our  people  poked  up 
the  rivers  in  America,  and  discovered  the  Indian 
pueblos." 

"Tell  them  what  you  were  telling  me,"  said 
Patsy.  "  He  has  been  here  ever  so  long,  and  has  fer- 
reted out  a  lot  of  interesting  things  about  Cordova." 

"There  is  not  much  to  tell  that  you  don't  know. 

The  old  game  of  civilization  is  going  on  in  the  world 
to-day  just  as  it  was  then.  You  have  only  to  cross 
the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  and  go  over  to  Morocco  and 
up  into  the  Atlas  Mountains  to  find  a  Kabyl  village 
very  like  the  primitive  Iberian  pueblo  the  Greeks 
and  Phoenicians  found  here.  The  French  may  be 
a  little  quicker  about  civilizing  Morocco  than  the 
Phoenicians  and  Greeks  were  in  civilizing  the 
Peninsula,  though  I  doubt  it." 

"You  said,"  Patsy  insisted,  "that  you  had  seen 
some  things  in  a  museum  that  gave  you  a  pretty 
clear  idea  of  how  they  lived  in  Cordova,  when  it  be- 
longed to  Carthage." 

"I  saw  some  recent  finds  made  in  a  mound  not 
far  from  here,"  said  the  Argentine.  "A  bust 
which  they  call  the  Lady  of  Elche  that  has  some- 
thing of  the  early  Greek  feeling.  After  seeing  these 
things  and  reading  all  I  could  lay  hands  on  about 
them,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  Cordova  must 
have  been  a  pretty  civilized  place  under  the  Repub- 
lic of  Carthage.  The  people  had  gold  and  silver 
vessels,  —  the  Greeks  have  a  story  that  the  anchors 
of  their  galleys  were  gold.  They  certainly  had 
ivory  combs,  for  I  have  seen  them,  and  Greek  vases 
and  Celtic  pottery  —  geometric  raised  patterns  and 
all  —  and  coins  stamped  with  a  winged  horse. 
Then  we  know  all  about  their  wool,  what  fine  cloth 
they  made,  and  that  famous  scarlet  dye  of  the 
kermes  that  ran  the  Tyrian  purple  so  hard  in  the 
markets  of  the  East." 

"Those  markets  of  the  East  another  republic 
hankers  to  supply,"  Patsy  put  in. 

"Take  up  the  white  man's  burden  and  put  it  on  the  back 
Of  every  yaller  nigger  and  kick  him  when  he's  slack. 
They've  got  to  wear  our  cotton,  they've  got  to  drink  our  gin, 
And  pay  our  missionaries  to  save  their  souls  from  sin." 

He  threw  open  the  window  and  leaned  out. 

"It  has  stopped  raining.  My  wig!  do  you  smell 
the  flowers  ?  I  can  make  out  jasmine,  acacia,  and 
mignonette.  Spanish  flowers  seem  to  grow  with 
their  perfume  already  triple  distilled." 

"They  are  the  most  fragrant  in  the  world,"  said 
the  Argentine.  "Don't  sleep  with  your  windows 
open,  if  you  are  afraid  of  headache!  Now  you 
want  to  go  to  bed,  this  Son  of  the  Way  and  I  will 
say  good  night  to  you." 

A  few  minutes  later  Patsy's  laugh,  a  whiff  of  the 
Argentino's  cigarette,  some  broken  fragments  of 
their  talk  floated  in  at  the  window,  as  they  walked 
up  and  down  in  the  garden  outside. 

"The  original  inhabitants  of  Spain  —  what  they 
call  the  Iberians  -  '  said  the  Argentine. 

"Where  did  they  come  from?"  Patsy  inter- 
rupted. 

"Nobody  knows;  they  weren't  Aryans.     In  the 
Neolithic  Age  a  very  dark  race,  with  long  heads, 
and  thick  curling  hair  inhabited  the  whole  Penin- 
sula — " 

"I  do  not  propose  going  back  to  the  beginning 
of  time  to-night;"  said  J.  as  he  shut  the  window. 
"That  boy's  thirst  for  information  —  easily  ac- 
quired —  will  get  us  into  trouble  yet.  Don  Jaime 
comes  to-morrow.  How  will  he  and  this  new  friend 
get  along?" 

I  had  already  asked  myself  that  question. 

"Did  the  norias  keep  you  awake  ? ' '  Patsy  asked 
at  breakfast  the  next  morning.  "What  we  heard 
last  night  was  not  the  sighs  of  ghosts,  but  the  noise 
of  the  pumping  machines  that  supply  the  houses  with 
water!" 

Our  rooms  looked  into  a  walled  garden,  with 
flower-beds  framed  in  geometrical  designs,  sur- 
rounded by  nice  thick  box  borders.  There  was  a 
superb  syringa  in  full  bloom  that  looked  like  ivory 
and  smelt  like  honey.  The  jasmines  were  trained 
against  the  wall.  The  roses  were  glorious.  In  an 
outer  court,  where  the  poultry  lived,  a  patriarchal  fig- 
tree  shaded  a  row  of  old-fashioned  wooddh  beehives. 
Under  a  pergola  covered  by  grape-vines  stood  a  tiny 
house  no  bigger  than  a  sentry-box;  in  the  house 
sat  Vicente.  His  voice  waked  us  each  morning 
with  a  fierce  but  tremulous  cry: 

"Andar,  Morisco!" 

Close  to  the  sentry-box  was  the  noria.  Morisco, 
a  tall  mule  hitched  to  a  pole,  and  blindfolded  so 
that  he  should  not  grow  dizzy,  walked  round  and 
round  in  a  circle,  faithfully  pumping  the  water, 
while  Vicente  alternately  slept  and  exhorted  him 
to  "go!"  The  red-haired  waiter  told  us  Vicente's 
story.  In  his  youth  he  had  been  head  gardener  on 
a  Grandee's  estate.  For  twenty  years  he  had  been 
attached  to  the  hotel.  He  was  now  ninety-five 
years  old.  A  few  months  before  his  wife  had  died, 
at  the  age  of  one  hundred.  Until  then,  Vicente  had 
lived  at  home.  Now  that  there  is  nobody  to  cook 
and  wash  for  him,  the  proprietor  gives  him  a  room 
in  the  hotel,  his  food,  his  clothes,  a  little  money  for 
cigarettes;  for  his  companion,  Morisco. 

As  we  entered  the  garden,  Vicente  awoke  with  a 
start,  lighted  a  cigarette,  and  jerked  the  mule's 
bridle. 

"  Andar,  Morisco ! "  The  patient  mule,  who  had 
worked  while  Vicente  slept,  trod  his  weary  round  a 
little  faster,  the  clatter  of  his  hoofs  mingling  with  the 
droning  creak,  creak  of  the  noria. 

A  browfc  girl  passed  from  the  outer  court,  where 
she  had  been  taking  down  the  washing,  half  hidden 
by  the  pile  of  linen  in  her  arms.  4 

"He,  he!  Basta  aqua,  Vicente!"  she  cried,  and 
went  into  the  hot  laundry  with  her  linen. 

"Muy  bien,  Rafaela."  Vicente  sneezed,  re- 
lighted his  cigarette,  with  trembling  hands  unhar- 
nessed Morisco,  and  toddled  off  with  him  to  the 
stable.  In  a  few  moments  the  old  man  came  back, 
and  pottered  about  the  garden,  making  his  tour  of 
inspection.  Nothing  escaped  his  wise  old  eyes. 
He  crushed  a  snail  that  was  devouring  a  vel- 
vety pansy,  nipped  off  an  overblown  peony, 
stripped  the  buds  and  foliage  so  ruthlessly  from  a 
fine  red  carnation  that  I  had  to  ask  him  the  reason. 

"  This  work  should  have  been  done  in  September, 
but  I  was  not  here  then.  We  shall  have  poor  car- 
nations this  year."  From  the  look  of  them  —  they 
were  only  just  coming  into  bloom  —  they  would 
have  taken  a  prize  anywhere  out  of  Spain. 

"The  carnation  plant  has  need  of  cleanliness 
like  a  person.  What  I  take  off  is  its  misery.  See, 
these  are  nothing  but  leaves;  they  do  no  good,  they 
only  take  the  strength.  These  are  children;  there 
are  too  many  of  them!  Sacrifice  these  three  little 
buds,  and  in  fourteen  days  this  large  one  will  make 
a  carnation  so  big."  He  joined  his  palsied  hands 
at  the  finger  tips  to  show  me  the  size.  ,He  had 
thrown  some  of  the  "misery"  carelessly  on  the 
ground,  some  he  had  laid  carefully  in  a  pile. 

"Those  I  threw  away  are  nothing  but  leaves  and 
children.  These  others  are  little  plants,  you  see  the 
difference?  I  shall  plant  all  these;  not  one  must 
be  lost.  It  is  so  late  many  will  not  grow,  but  I  shall 
get  some  good  ones.  Very  soon  they  will  throw  out 
roots,  then  I  shall  transplant  them;  next  season 
they  will  bear.  The  carnation  is  only  good  for  three 
years;  the  second  season  is  the  best.  See,  this  is  an 
old  plant.  We  will  help  it  to  give  its  last  flowers. 
They  will  be  small,  but  of  a  good  variety."  He 
stirred  the  earth  about  the  roots,  and  mixed  with  it 
a  trowelful  of  rich  loam. 

"One  might  almost  live  in  a  place  where  they 
grow  suclrnowers!"  J.  began. 

"No,  one  might  not!"  cried  Patsy. 

"  Vicente  has  been  a  famous  gardener  in  his  day ! " 
the  waiter  had  said  it  more  than  once.  That  ex- 
plains why  the  pear  trees  were  so  well  pruned,  the 
oranges  so  healthy,  why  the  carnations  of  Cordova 
still  bloom  in  my  memory.  A  peacock  strutted 
down  the  brick  path,  hopped  on  the  wall  of  the 
noria,  spread  the  glory  of  his  tail,  turned  his  proud 
head  to  show  the  sapphire  sheen  of  his  neck,  and 
gave  his  strange  cry,  "manor  mahor." 

The  laundry  window  was  open.  We  could  see 
Rafaela's  pretty  head  bent  over  her  ironing,  and 
catch  the  words  she  sang : 

Contrabandista  es  mi  padre,     Contrabandista  is  my  father, 
contrabandista  es  mi  hermano,  Contrabandista  is  my  brother; 
Contrabandista  hade  ser  Contrabandista  he  must  be 

aquel  d  quien  de  mi  mano.        To  whom  I  give  my  hand. 

"The  trouble  with  Cordova  is,  it  is  dead  and  not 
buried,"  said  Patsy.  "  It  may  comfort  you  to  know 
it  was  the  first  town  in  Europe  to  have  paved  streets. 
I  believe  they  never  have  been  repaved  since."  We 
were  picking  our  way  over  the  abominable  pave- 
ment of  the  Plazuela  de  Seneca.  A  little  farther  on, 
near  the  Seven  Corners,  is  a  large  house  with  carved 
stone  fa9ade,  handsome  iron  gratings,  and  some- 
thing distinguished  about  it  that  caught  our  atten- 
tion. It  stands  in  a  deserted  plaza  where  the  grass 
grows  between  the  paving  stones.  For  five  minutes 
we  had  met  nobody,  not  even  acat  or  dog.  We  peeped 
into  the  patio.  There  was  no  living  thing  there  ex- 
cept a  fountain  and  a  tame  quail  asleep  in  a  cage. 

"The  palace  of  the  Sleeping  Beauty!"  mur- 
mured Patsy.  We  went  round  behind  the  house  to 
explore.  The  frowsy  little  street  at  the  back  was 
fragrant  with  a  smell  of  new  baked  bread  that  made 
us  hungry.  Through  a  half -closed  gate  we  saw  a 
courtyard  full  of  beggras.  An  inner  door  opened, 
and  tWe  lady  of  the  silver  curls  whom  we  had  first 
seen  on  Cordova  Bridge  came  out  followed  by  two 
servants  carrying  baskets  filled  with  bread.  The 
beggars  formed  in  line  and  shuffled  past  the  lady, 
who  gave  a  loaf  to  each  and  received  a  blessing  in 
return. 

"Bread  is  given  out  at  this  house  every  Satur- 
day," said  a  little  gentleman  in  a  black  stock,  who 
was  passing.  "Last  year,  when  there  was  a  death 
in  the  family,  they  gave  alms  for  nine  days.  The 
pordioseros  have  no  better  friend  in  all  Cordova 
than  the  mistress  of  this  house." 

As  the  last  beggar  hobbled  from  the  court,  a  car- 
riage drawn  by  a  pair  of  sleek  mules  drove  out,  with 
two  ladies  and  a  gentleman.  Just  then  Don 
Jaime  came  round  the  corner  in  search  of  us;  he 
bowed  to  the  ladies. 

"Who  are  your  friends?"  Patsy  demanded. 

"The  old  it  is  Duquesa  B.  It  is  no  longer  young, 
but  conserved  very  good,  eh  ?  Her  daughter  it  is 
appelled  Rafaela.  Was  Queen  of  Beauty  at  the 
Yuego  Florales.  To  the  elected  poet  she  gave  the 
prize,  a  natural  rose." 

"He  means  that  they  have  a  Contest  of  Poets 
every  year  here,"  said  Patsy.  "  A  theme  is  given 
out,  a  jury  appointed,  then  the  poems  just  stream  in 
from  all  over  the  province.  From  what  the  Don 
says,  this  old  dustheap  of  a  Cordova  wakes  up  a 
little  at  fair  time.  What  luck  that  we  saw  the 
Beauty!" 

"Did  you  see  who  was  sitting  opposite  her?" 
asked  J.  "It  was  O'Shea." 

"He's  easily  consoled  for  Trinidad."  In  spite 
of  Patsy's  natural  jealousy,  that  meeting  with 
O'Shea  was  a  comfort  to  us  all.  It  seemed  to  bring 
us  out  of  musty,  dusty  Cordova's  dead  past,  and 
link  us  with  dear,  living  Seville.  In  the  cool  of  the 
afternoon,  the  streets  woke  up  a  little;  there  were 
more  carriages  than  one  would  have  supposed  pos- 
sible in  the  Paseo  of  El  Gran  Capitan. 

That  evening  we  went  to  the  theatre.  The  per- 
formance began  at  half -past  eight.  The  price  of 
box  was  five  pesetas  for  each  play.  There  were 
four  different  pieces,  each  lasting  about  an  hour. 
The  advantage  of  the  system  is,  you  can  drop  into 
a  theatre  early  or  late,  and  are  not  obliged  to  pay 
for  more  of  the  performance  than  you  see.  The 
first  play,  about  a  contrabandist  and  his  sweet- 
heart, a  cigarrera,  was  full  of  gunshots  and  moral- 
ity, and  highly  applauded,  though  the  acting  was 
mediocre.  Patsy,  who  discovered  several  pretty 
girls  in  the  audience,  asked  the  Don  if  the  women  of 
Northern  Spain  were  as  charming  as  in  the  South. 

"Not  all  women  in  Andalusia  is  beautifool,"  the 
Don  admitted,  "but  all  is  gracious;  the  young  gels 
have  a  naturality.  The  Madrilenas,  it  is  affective 
their  manniers  for  to  speak,  it  is  different  from  the 
Andaluz!" 

J.  and  I  were  satisfied  with  two  plays.  Patsy 
and  Don  Jaime  stayed  for  the  last,  an  operetta. 

"I  like  him  better  the  music,  it  is  the  end  repre- 
sentation," said  the  Don. 

The  next  day  Pasty  had  a  great  deal  to  tell  us 
about  Cordova.  "There  are  about  twenty  of  the 
old  aristocratic  families  who  still  live  here,"  he  said. 
"There  is  literally  nothing  for  the  young  men  to  do 
but  loaf  about  the  Club  of  Friendship,  where,  Don 
Jaime  says,  half  the  nobility  of  the  province  have 
been  ruined  by  gambling.  Some  people  he  knows 
have  had  to  sell  their  silver.  They  had  a  complete 
silver  service,  tureen,  vegetable  dishes,  plates,  plat- 
ters, all  the  rest  of  it,  for  every  day.  They  only 
used  their  English  porcelain  for  best;  now  they 
have  to  use  it  every  day.  The  same  people  had 
solid  silver  basins  and  pitchers,  and  dozens  of  those 
stunning  old  repousse  silver  trays  and  platters  they 
used  to  make  here.  You  see  the  Don  knows 
Cordova  well;  he  can  tell  you  more  about  it  in  an 
hour  than  you  could  get  out  of  books  in  a 
year." 

The  Don  twirled  his  mustache  and  ran  his  fingers 
through  his  hair.  "I  have  a  custom  to  come  to 
Cordoba  every  winter,"  he  admitted.  "At  that 
season  all  families  is  at  their  coontry  place  in  the 
hills  for  the  shootings.  In  the  coto  of  my  friend  it  is 
no  luxury,  all  comfort.  The  ladies  go  very  simple, 
put  a  handkerchief  over  the  head,  or  an  old  hat;  the 
children  is  dressed  very  plain,  like  the  poor." 

"Is  the  sport  good  ?"  asked  Patsy. 

"In  my  youth  it  was  more  plenty  the  black  beasts 
(wild  boar).  Now  is  much  deer,  hares,  rabbits, 
partridges." 

"Do  you  care  about  shooting?"  I  asked.  The 
Don  never  walked  a  step,  if  he  could  avoid  it,  and 
got  up  at  two  in  the  afternoon.  I  could  not  think  of 
him  in  the  light  of  a  sportsman. 

"It  is  the  preferred  sport  of  all  Spanishes 
men  as  of  the  English,"  he  answered.  "The  ladies 
like  the  coontry  very  mooch;  some  of  them  kill  the 
game.  We  have  large  fires  of  great  tree  troonks, 
no  small  pieces  of  woods  like  in  the  city.  In  the 
evening  it  is  very  sociable;  we  gather  at  one  house 
or  another;  there  is  singing  and  dancing.  Ah,  yes, 
the  most  pleasant  life  is  in  the  coontry.  If  the 
guests  come  far,  they  spend  the  night.  It  is  all  so 
simply,  no  like  England.  One  large  room  for  all 
the  ladies;  one  for  all  the  gentlemen." 

I  asked  the  Don  if  they  stayed  in  their  country 
places  in  summer. 

"No,  in  the  spring  they  return  to  Cordoba.  The 
hot  is  very  strong;  here  the  houses  is  prepared  for 
the  hot.  All  people  sit  out  in  the  court.  In  soomer, 
they  go  to  take  another  climate.  The  Sierra  is  not 
good  for  the  health,  it  is  very  humid." 

"He  was  telling  me  last  night,"  said  Patsy,  about 
the  time  Queen  Isabel  II  came  to  Cordova.  He 
was  only  a  boy  then,  but  his  father  was  at  a  banquet 
the  Marquis  de  Benemeji  gave  for  her  at  Quita 
Pesares  —  Away  Cares;  isn't  that  a  good  name  for 
a  garden  ?  The  old  gentleman  must  have  plied  a 

better  knife  and  fork  than  the  Don,  for  Jaime 
remembers  to  this  day  the  way  his  father  rolled  up 
his  eyes  when  he  told  them  about  the  good  things 
they  had  to  eat.  Aroz  a  la  Valenciana  —  baked 
rice  with  fish,  quails,  green  peas  and  artichokes; 
saddle  of  veal  larded  and  roasted  with  aromatic 
herbs  and  manzanilla,  rice  boiled  in  cream  with  the 
name  of  the  best  guest  at  each  table  traced  in  pow- 
dered cinnamon,  natilla,  a  wonderful  kind  of  cream, 
and  ojaldres, —  a  sort  of  pastry,  light  and  brittle  as 
a  butterfly's  wing,  which  they  eat  with  chocolate. 
When  they  had  eaten  and  drunk  all  that  they  could, 
the  Queen  said  good-bye  and  started  to  go.  What 
do  you  suppose  she  found  at  the  door  ?  A  brand  new 
coach,  Andalusian  style,  with  eight  splendid  cab- 
allos  antigrados  (Cordovan  horses  with  yellow  skins 
marked  like  tigers)  harnessed  Andalusian  fashion, 
with  silver  bells  and  silken  tags.  The  Queen 
hopped  into  the  coach  and  drove  away.  She  took  it 
back  to  Madrid,  where,  the  Don  thinks,  we  can  see 
it  still  in  the  royal  stables.  He  says  Cordova  has 
traditions  to  live  up  to. 

When  the  Queen's  son,  Alfonzo  XII,  came  here, 
the  days  of  coaches  were  gone  by.  The  Grandee 
at  whose  house  the  King  stayed  had  the  railroad 
tracks  laid  through  the  streets  to  his  door?  so  that 
the  King  should  not  have  the  trouble  of  driving 
from  the  station  to  the  house." 

"Speaking  of  railroads,"  said  J.  "I  think  I've 
had  enough  of  Cordova." 

"So  have  I,  this  season,"  Patsy  agreed.  "Next 
year,  when  I  make  the  tour  of  all  the  ferias  of 
Spain,  with  my  friend  the  Mountebank,  I  shall 
come  back  to  Cordova  and  enter  the  Contest  of 
Poets." 

From  that  moment  till  we  left,  I  spent  every  wak- 
ing hour  in  the  Mosque,  the  thing  best  worth  seeing 
in  Cordova.  Outside,  it  looks  more  like  a  fortress 
than  a  sanctuary.  It  has  battlements,  towers  and 
buttresses  quite  in  character  with  the  militant 
Mahommedan  religion,  and  hopelessly  out  of  char- 
acter with  the  Christian.  It  is  grim,  forbidding, 
and  tremendously  impressive  all  at  once!  The 
gates,  the  gates  alone,  give  a  hint  of  the  beauty  in- 
side! The  light,  interlaced,  horseshoe  arches  rest- 
ing on  slender  columns,  and  the  rich  mosaic  over 
the  Puerta  Arabe  are  like  a  foretaste  of  a  feast.  In 
the  splendid  court  of  Oranges,  where  the  trees  are 
planted  in  long  aisles  (they  originally  were  a  con- 
tinuation of  the  aisles  of  the  Mosque) ,  there  are  five 
fountains,  and  fifty  beggars  and  guides.  As  we 
were  making  a  bargain  with  the  youngest  guide  to 
keep  the  others  at  bay,  the  Argentine  came  up  and 
offered  his  services  in  the  place  of  a  guide. 

"I  have  had  them  all,"  he  said;  "and  picked 
their  brains  like  a  corbie." 

We  sat  on  a  bench  and  watched  the  women  draw- 
ing water  at  the  fountain  while  the  Argentino  —  he 
spoke  English  rather  better  than  any  of  us  —  and 
Patsy  talked  like  two  Trappists,  newly  absolved 
from  the  vow  of  silence! 

'Think  of  the  Mosque  first  as  the  most  perfect 
thing  left  of  the  Cordova  of  the  Caliphs,  the  city  of 
Abd-er-Rahman,  whom  you  tell  me  you  saw  cross 
the  old  bridge  the  night  you  arrived.  I  have  not 
been  so  fortunate,  though  I  have  had  a  sense  of  him 
more  than  once  sitting  here  in  his  court.  If  it  were 
not  for  the  Mosque,  the  story  of  Moorish  Cordova 
would  be  to  me  as  the  Thousand  and  Second  Story 
of  Scheherezade.  Even  so,  I  can  hardly  believe  it. 
This,  a  city  of  a  million  inhabitants  —  think  of  it! 
Those  silent,  God-forsaken  streets  full  of  people, 
the  place  fairly  humming  with  business.  Thou- 
sands of  looms  weaving  stuffs,  tissues,  carpets. 
You  know  what  Cordova  leather  was  ?  It  has  never 
been  equalled.  As  to  their  blacksmiths,  their  sil- 
ver and  goldsmiths,  there  are  none  like  them  in  the 
world  to-day  that  I  know." 

Patsy  took  a  brown  paper  parcel  from  his  pocket. 
"Here  are  some  rather  nice  bits  I  have  picked  up." 
He  showed  a  close  silver  chain,  supple  as  a  serpent, 
and  a  fascinating  pair  of  gold  filigree  earrings 
studded  with  small  emeralds. 

"  You're  in  luck.  These  look  like  real  old  Cordova 
work.  The  jeweller's  art  is  the  hardest  to  kill 
of  all,  except  the  cook's.  They  make  nice  jewelry 
here  still;  the  pastry  and  the  orange  flower  sweet- 
meats of  Cordova  are  the  best  I  have  eaten  in  Spain. 
Of  all  the  arts  of  Cordova,  the  cook's  and  the  jew- 
eller's alone  survive!  Man  is  still  greedy;  woman 
—  may  I  say  it  ?  —  still  vain." 

"But  wasn't  the  University  the  great  thing  after 
all?"  said  Patsy. 

"Right!  You  can't  say  it  too  often  or  too  loud. 
When  you  hear  the  Jews  abused,  speak  up,  tell  the 
old  story  over  again.  In  the  Dark  Ages,  when 
in  the  rest  of  Europe,  Greece  and  Rome  were  forgot- 
ten, asleep,  seemingly  dead,  the  spirit  of  Athens  and 
of  Rome  was  alive  here  in  Cordova.  Art,  phi- 
losophy, science, —  our  great  inheritance  from  the 
older  civilizations  —  were  held  in  trust  for  you  and 
me  right  here  by  the  Jews  and  Arabs  of  Cordova." 

"That  won't  be  forgotten  while  Dante  is  read." 
Patsy  quoted  a  line  from  the  Inferno : 

"  Averrois  che  il  gran  commento  feo." 

"  No,  six  words  from  Dante  give  a  man  a  patent 
of  nobility  in  the  Republic  of  Letters  that  outlives 
any  title  an  emperor  confers.  Well,  that  Averroes, 
that  same  Hebrew  Jew  whom  Dante  met  along 
with  those  other  Cordovans,  Seneca  and  Lucan,  in 
the  place  of  the  sighing,  unbaptized  spirits,  lived 
and  wrote  his  great  Commentary  on  Aristotle  here 
in  Cordova.  He  probably  walked  through  this 
court  every  day,  he  washed  perhaps  in  that  foun- 
tain; ate  oranges,  may  be,  from  those  trees  —  how 
should  I  know  the  life  of  an  orange  ?  " 

'  Those  two  men,"  said  J.  to  me,  "would  rather 
talk  about  a  thing  any  day  than  see  it."  So  we  left 
Patsy  and  the  Argentine  reconstructing  old  Cor- 
dova, and  went  to  look  at  the  Mosque. 

Inside  we  soon  lost  ourselves  in  a  forest  of  col- 
umns, with  long  aisles  running  in  every  direction. 
Every  path  we  chose  led  to  beauty.  The  columns 
are  of  many  different  marbles,  porphyry,  jasper, 
Africano,  alabaster,  verde  antique;  of  all  styles, 
and  many  periods.  We  found  some  from  the  old 
Roman  temple  of  Janus ;  some  with  smooth  polished 
shafts;  some  twisted,  with  Roman,  Arab,  Byzan- 
tine or  Visigothic  capitals.  The  mosque  has  been 
compared  to  the  bed  of  Procrustes,  —  if  the  col- 
umn was  too  short,  it  was  lengthened  by  adding  a 
base;  if  too  long,  it  was  sunk  into  the  ground. 
Whatever  the  columns  might  have  been  originally, 
they  now  are  all  of  the  same  height,  and  serve  to 
hold  up  the  beautiful  double  arches  that  support 
the  roof. 

We  found  our  way  to  the  Mihrab,  a  wonderful 
little  octagonal  chapel.  The  roof  is  a  shell  hol- 
lowed from  a  single  block  of  marble,  the  walls  are 

of  marble  finely  carved.  A  deep  groove  is  worn  in 
the  pavement  by  the  knees  of  the  pilgrims  who 
made  the  tour  of  the  Mihrab  seven  times,  for  in 
those  days  a  pilgrimage  to  Cordova  was  as  good  as 
one  to  Mecca. 

"  Los  Moros  que  te  labraron 
capilla  del  Zancarron 
merecian  ser  Cristianos." 

'  That  means  the  Moors  that  made  you,  chapel  of 
the  bare  bone,  deserved  to  be  Christians,"  said 
Patsy,  coming  up  behind  us.  "  Bare  bone,  because 
one  of  Mohammed's  shin-bones  is  supposed  to 
have  been  worshipped  here." 

"  Si  hoy  mismo  resucitaran 
aqui  en  Cordoba  los  moros 
cada  cual  se  iba  a  su  casa." 

the  Argentino  capped  the  copla.  '  That  means 
if  to-day  the  Moors  here  in  Cordova  rose  from  the 
dead,  each  could  go  to  his  own  house,  —  because 
the  houses  are  so  little  changed,  I  suppose,  and 
because  their  descendants  have  kept  the  keys." 

As  if  in  answer  to  the  challenge,  there  came 
slowly  towards  us,  down  a  narrow  aisle  of  flanking 
columns,  two  tall  Moors,  dressed  all  in  white. 
They  had  left  their  shoes  at  the  door  of  the  Mosque ; 
each  carried  a  prayer  rug.  They  entered  the  small, 
seven-sided  chapel  that  leads  to  the  holy  of  holies, 
and  placing  their  rugs  upon  the  ground  stood  under 
the  pineapple  dome  with  bowed  heads.  There  we 
left  them  on  the  threshold  of  the  Mihrab,  in  the 
Mosque  of  their  fathers. 

"  Haven't  we  seen  the  impossible  thing  ?  "  cried 
Patsy.  We  were  outside  the  church  in  the  hot 
sunshine,  having  left  those  grave  Moors  undis- 
turbed in  the  shadowy  mosque. 

.  We  had  seen  the  impossible  thing,  the  only  thing 
worth  seeing,  as  the  only  thing  worth  doing.  Since 
the  Conquest  of  Granada,  it  is  as  difficult  to  see  a 
Moor  in  Spain  as  to  meet  an  Iroquois  in  Broadway, 
but,  —  we  had  not  dreamed  them !  They  were 
real  Moors  in  the  suite  of  the  envoys  of  the  Sultan 
of  Morocco  at  the  Algeciras  Conference,  who  had 
taken  advantage  of  a  few  days  recess,  and  come  up 
to  see  Cordova. 

As  we  stood  absorbed  in  thinking  of  those  Moors, 
whose  red  morocco  slippers  lay  before  us  on  the 
steps,  we  did  not  notice  what  was  happening  just 
behind  us. 

"  Off  with  your  hats,  heretic  Jews !  "  The  words 
were  hissed  in  Patsy's  ear,  —  he  stood  nearest  the 
church  door;  his  hat  was  knocked  off  his  head. 
'  Take  that,  and  that,  and  that!  "  He  was  hit  in 
the  face  three  times  with  a  fan  by  a  small  lady  in 
black  satin. 

The  Argentine  drew  us  quickly  aside,  as  a  pro- 
cession of  priests  came  out  of  the  door.  One 
carried  something  that  was  hidden  by  the  rich 
vestment  hunched  over  his  shoulders  and  covering 
his  hands. 

"  They  are  taking  the  sacrament  to  some  sick 
person,"  the  Argentine  explained.  At  that  mo- 
ment Don  Jaime,  who  had  come  up  without  our 
seeing  him,  tried  to  pour  oil  upon  the  troubled 
waters. 

"  These  are  strangers,  Seiiora,  they  did  not  know 
that  his  divine  majesty  was  about  to  pass." 

The  little  old  lady  was  nothing  appeased;  she 
gave  us  one  last  furious  look,  and  muttering  "Ac- 
cursed heretic  Jews!"  followed  the  priests  with  the 
sacrament. 

"That's  the  same  spirit  that  more  than  once  has 
drenched  this  city  in  the  blood  of  its  best  people," 
said  the  Argentine.  "In  Abd-er-Rahman's  time 
the  church  of  St.  Vicente  that  stood  here,  on  the 
site  of  the  Temple  of  Janus,  was  divided  between 
Christians  and  Musselmans.  They  worshipped 
under  the  same  roof  till  Abd-er-Rahman  bought  the 
Christians  out  and  built  this  Mosque.  The  Chris- 
tian priests  left  the  church  peaceably,  in  procession, 
carrying  the  pictures  and  relics  of  the  saints. 
Afterwards  the  Mohammedan  Marabouts  and  the 
Christian  fanatics  stirred  up  all  the  strife;  they  are 

equally  responsible  for  the  threat  slitting,  burning, 
and  torturing;  there's  not  a  pin  to  choose  between 
them.  That  old  lady  would  send  us  to  the  stake 
to-day  if  she  could.  Priest  and  woman,  the  old 
allies!  Do  you  know,  Sefior,  that  the  future  of 
Spain  depends  upon  the  education  you  give  your 
women."  His  eyes  flashed  as  he  asked  Jaime  the 
question.  The  Don  looked  back  at  him  with 
withering  scorn. 

"The  ladies  of  Spain  receive  the  education  best 
suited  to  them,"  he  said  gravely. 

"They  know  how  to  use  their  fans,"  said  Patsy; 
his  nose  had  begun  to  bleed.  "That  I  should  be 
assaulted  for  the  first  time  in  my  life  by  a  little  old 
lady  with  a  fan, —  wonderful !  I  will  say  she's  the 
livest  thing  I've  seen  in  Cordova." 

"You  saw  who  she  was?"  said  J.  "The 
lady  with  the  silver  curls  who  didn't  want  to  pay 
duty  on  the  ham,  and  who  gives  bread  to  the  beg- 
gars of  Cordova  every  Saturday." 

Chapter VIII GRANADA 

Quiero  wvir  en  Granada  I  like  to  live  in  Granada 

porque  me  gusta  el  oir  Because  it  pleases  me  to  hear 

la  campana  de  la  Vela  The  bell  of  the  Vela 

quando  me  voy  a  dormir.  When  I  am  going  to  sleep. 

"TTITHO'S  there?" 

V  V     "People  of  peace." 

Encarnacion  opened  the  door  of  the  bell  tower 
just  a  crack.  Though  the  sun  had  not  set,  it  was 
already  dark  inside  the  watch-tower  of  the  Alham- 
bra.  The  walls  are  six  feet  thick;  the  windows, 
narrow  slits  on  the  winding  stair,  let  in  very  little 
light.  Encarnacion  carried  a  classic  brass  lamp 
for  olive  oil.  She  shaded  the  flame  from  her  eyes 
with  a  long,  hairy  hand,  and  the  light  shining 
through  showed  how  thin  it  was.  Maria,  the 
younger  sister,  as  grim  looking,  though  more  timid 
in  her  bearing,  stood  behind,  peering  over  Encarna- 
cion's  shoulder. 

"It  is  the  young  caballero  and  his  friends,"  she 
whispered.  Encarnacion  threw  the  door  wide 
open,  the  two  sisters  smiled  hospitably  upon  us  like 
a  pair  of  kind  ogresses. 

"But  come  in." 

"Come  in." 

They  echoed  each  other  as  if  they  were  singing 
a  perpetual  duet. 

"  They  are  welcome." 

"Welcome." 

"  Will  they  be  pleased  to  enter  ?" 

"To  enter!" 

We  followed  the  sisters  to  a  square  room  with 
enormously  thick  walls.  A  range  was  built  into 
one  corner,  a  charcoal  fire  smouldered  under  a  tiny 
grate,  where  something  that  smelt  very  good  bub- 
bled in  an  earthenware  pot.  Four  cages  of  cana- 
ries hung  against  the  wall.  A  brindled  cat  stole 
in  behind  us.  licked  its  whiskers,  fixed  fierce, 
unwinking  eyes  on  the  birds.  Maria  threatened 
him  with  her  finger. 

"Bad  little  cat !  Who  killed  the  young  robin  in  the 
myrtle  hedge  ?  And  now  you  make  eyes  at  these  ? 
He  knows  too  much  to  touch  them;  he  looks  and 
looks  at  them,  and  then  goes  out  and  chases  the 
wild  birds." 

In  the  middle  of  the  room  stood  a  round  work- 
table  covered  with  sewing.  A  jacket,  half  cut  out 
of  red  cotton,  lay  near  a  pair  of  shears.  From  an 
opening  in  the  dark,  vaulted  ceiling  over  the  work- 
table,  dangled  a  long  knotted  cord. 

"That  is  the  rope  of  the  campana  de  la  Vela!" 
said  Encarnacion. 

"Is  it  true  that  it  is  you  who  ring  the  bell  of  the 
Vela?" 

"Yes,  once  every  half  hour,  from  eight  o'clock 
in  the  evening  till  four  in  the  morning,  we  ring  the 
bell  in  the  watch-tower." 

"You  sit  up  all  night  to  do  it?  Isn't  it  dread- 
fully cold?" 

"Yes,  it  is  often  very  cold.  In  winter  we  have  a 
fire."  Encarnacion  drew  aside  the  chintz  curtains 
that  hid  the  lower  part  of  the  table,  and  showed  a 
copper  brazier  covered  with  a  wire  netting  that 
stood  underneath. 

"  We  kindle  the  charcoal,  put  our  feet  close  to  the 
brazier  on  this  wooden  shelf,  and  wrap  ourselves  up 
in  heavy  shawls  and  hoods.  We  manage  very  well, 
we  are  so  used  to  it." 

"What  do  you  do  with  yourselves  through  the 
long  winter  nights  ?  How  do  you  pass  the  time  ?" 

"There  is  always  plenty  of  work;  we  take  in 
sewing.  Sometimes  one  of  us  reads  aloud  to  the 
other." 

"Do  you  two  live  here  quite  alone  ?" 

"Sometimes  our  brother  is  with  us,  not  always," 
sigfied  Encarnacion.  "I  have  been  the  portress 
of  the  Torre  de  la  Vela  since  the  night  the  tower 
was  struck  by  lightning  and  our  father  and  mother, 
now  in  glory,  were  killed." 

"Now  in  glory  were  killed!"  echoed  Maria. 

"What  a  terrible  thing!     When  did  it  happen  ?  " 

"  Long  and  long  ago, —  the  year  Maria  made  her 
first  communion.  We  were  waked  by  a  great 
crash.  The  tower  shook,  the  bell  rang  as  never 
before,  there  was  a  thick  smoke.  It  was  easy  for 
us  to  escape,  we  slept  below;  our  brother  slept 
above,  near  our  parents.  He  saved  his  life  by  clap- 
ping a  towel  over  his  mouth,  and  creeping  down- 
stairs on  his  hands  and  knees." 

"On  his  knees,"  Maria  crossed  herself.  "Vir- 
gin mine!  May  the  Lord  receive  them  into. Para- 
dise in  their  shoes!" 

"The  bell  gives  the  signal  for  opening  the 
sluices,"  Encarnacion  went  on;  "it  regulates  the  ir- 
rigation of  the  vega.  Each  piece  of  land  has  its 
hour  for  letting  on  the  water.  On  still  nights  you 
can  hear  the  bell  thirty  miles  away." 

High  up  in  the  Sierra  Nevada  Mountains  over 
Granada,  the  Darrow,  a  mountain  torrent  flow- 
ing down  from  the  eternal  snows  on  the  summits, 
is  caught,  tamed,  and  led  off  into  small  channels 
that  spread,  like  the  veins  of  a  man's  body,  all 
over  the  vega.  Moors'  work  this;  perhaps  the 
greatest  part  of  their  legacy  to  Spain,  for  water 
is  wealth.  Thanks  to  the  Moors,  the  vega  of 
Granad£  is  the  garden  of  the  Peninsula;  the  hemp 
grown  here  is  the  finest,  the  olives  and  grapes  are 
the  best.  The  land  bears  three  crops  a  year  in 
succession, —  wheat,  beans  and  corn.  Part  of  it  is 
now  given  over  to  the  new  sugar  beet  industry ;  the 
beets  grown  here  are  enormous.  The  soil  is  light 
and  clean;  you  will  not  find  a  stone  in  a  whole  field. 
The  regulation  of  the  complicated  system  of  irriga- 
tion, the  life  blood  of  Granada,  is  in  the  hands  of 
Encarnacion  and  Maria.  To  live  in  a  tower,  of  all 
others  in  a  tower  of  the  Alhambra,  and  spend  your 
life  helping  to  make  Granada  green  and  beautiful, 
seems  a  pleasant  existence,  even  if  it  be  a  lonely  one. 
To  wake  when  others  sleep,  and  sleep  when  all  the 
world's  awake,  always  seems  a  hard  fate. 

'Your  birds  must  be  a  great  company  to  you," 
I  said  to  Maria. 

"  Claro.  We  raise  them  ourselves.  Would  you 
like  to  see  the  little  ones  ?  We  keep  them  in  our 
bedroom  where  it  is  warmer." 

"Do  me  the  favor,"  Encarnacion  relighted  the 
lamp,  and  showed  the  way  up  the  heavy  stone 
stairway. 

The  neat  upper  room  where  the  sisters  slept  had 
three  beds.  In  spite  of  the  thick  whitewash  on  the 
walls,  we  could  still  make  out  the  graceful  lines  of 
the  old  Moorish  arches  and  windows.  A  palm 
branch,  a  crucifix,  and  a  chromo  of  the  Madonna  of 
Lourdes  appearing  to  Bernadette,  hung  between 
the  beds.  At  one  end  of  the  room  was  a  long  table 
with  the  breeding  cages  of  the  canaries,  whose  loves 
and  nurseries  the  sisters  of  the  tower  guard  so 
tenderly. 

"See  this  little  one;"  Maria  put  her  face  close  to 
the  cage  and  made  a  little  singing  sound.  "He's 
getting  strong  now;  he  was  weakly  at  first,  and  I 
thought  we  should  lose  him.  It  would  be  a  pity; 
his  father  is  our  best  singer."  The  canaries,  all  in 
a  flutter  at  being  waked  up,  chattered  and  scolded 
at  her. 

"Maria  will  take  them  up  to  see  the  view,"  said 
Encarnacion;  "if  they  will  excuse  me,  I  will  go 
down  in  case  some  one  else  should  call."  I  am 
afraid  Encarnacion  knew  we  liked  Maria  best. 

Down  in  the  town  of  Granada  the  bells  were 
ringing  like  mad,  the  nightingales  were  singing  in 
the  Duke  of  Wellington's  elms,  that  shade  the  long, 
steep  road  leading  from  the  town  to  the  red  city  of 
the  Alhambra,  perched  high  above  it.  At  the  foot 
of  the  tower  was  a  carpet  of  wild  flowers,  ane- 
mones, wild  callas,  and  many  other  blossoms  I 
did  not  know. 

"Is  the  snow  always  there?"  J.  asked,  pointing 
to  the  Sierra  Nevada. 

"I    was    born    in   the    tower,"    said    Maria; 
"I  have  lived  here  all  my  life,  and  I  have 
never  seen  those  mountains  without  snow.  That 
is  the  campana  de  la  Vela"  she  pointed  to  a 
huge  bronze  bell  hanging  in  the  turret.  ''You 
should  see  the  tower  on  the  day  after  New  Year. 
How  many  girls  come  up  to  see  the  view  that  day! 
They  believe,  foolish  ones,  that  she  who  rings  the 
bell  on  the  second  of  January  will  get  a  husband 
before  the  year  is  over."  Maria  smiled,  with  grim 
close-shut  lips.  Had  she  ever  been  weak  enough 
to  try  the  charm  ?  For  Encarnacion  it  was  un- 
thinkable. 

"When  Don  Alfonzo  was  here  we  asked  him  to 
ring  the  bell.  Though  he  laughed  very  much,  he 
would  not.  From  what  we  hear,  he  will  be  mar- 
ried before  New  Year  all  the  same." 

In  the  Torre  de  la  Vela  they  know  all  that  is 
going  on.  It  was  growing  dark;  the  stars  were 
pricking  through  the  blue;  down  in  the  city  of 
Granada  the  lights  seemed  to  reflect  them. 

"Is  that  the  Gypsy  quarter  ?"  I  asked  Maria.  I 
could  just  make  out  doors  like  the  one  leading  to 
Aladdin's  cave,  in  the  face  of  a  hillside  far  below. 

"Yes,  that  is  the  Albaicin.  You  have  been 
there?" 

"Not  yet;  to-morrow  we  shall  go  to  see  some 
Gypsy  dancing." 

Maria  shrugged  scornful  shoulders.     "  Take  care 
they  don't  pick  your  pockets.  The  Gitanos  are 
great  thieves ;  they  are  taught  to  steal  from  the  time 
they  are  babies.  You  may  like  what  you  will  see. 
When  there  are  no  ladies,"  she  held  up  her  hands 
in  horror,  "their  dances  are  not  to  be  imagined  or 
described.  Do  not  let  him  go  by  himself."  She 
looked  at  Patsy,  leaning  over  the  parapet  absorbed 
in  the  view.  "They  are  deceitful  hussies!  The 
dances  they  dance  when  men  go  alone  are  very 
different  from  what  you  will  see!" 

"That  would  be  a  hot  walk  without  the  shade  of 
those  trees,"  said  Patsy.  "  Pleasant  that  we  should 
remember  the  Iron  Duke  in  Spain  most  of  all  for 
his  elms.  Who  loves  his  fellow  men,  plants  trees. 
The  English  are  civilized,  confound  'em!  The 
longer  you're  in  Europe,  the  more  you  have  to  think 
of  England  as  the  Great  Friend." 

There  was  no  excuse  to  linger  longer.  The 
sisters  had  invited  us  to  sup,  and  we  had  declined. 

"Go  you  with  God,"  said  Encarnacion,  she 
came  with  us  to  the  door.  "To-night  when  you 
hear  the  campana  de  la  Vela,  think  of  Maria  and 
me  in  the  tower." 

"In  the  tower,"  echoed  Maria  over  her  shoulder. 

The  next  day  we  drove  to  the  Albaicin,  by  the 
road  of  the  Sacred  Mountain.  The  base  of  the 
mountain  is  honeycombed  with  gypsy  cave  dwel- 
lings. The  caves  are  built,  or  rather  excavated, 
at  four  different  levels,  and  entered  from  rough 
terraces.  The  gypsy  settlement  seemed  a  sort  of 
primitive  community,  like  those  from  which  Tan- 
giers  and  Naples  must  have  developed  into  the 
terraced  cities  they  are  to-day.  Higher  up  the 
mountains  are  the  sacred  caves  where  hermits  once 
lived.  On  the  summit  is  a  large  church  and  a  relig- 
ious house. 

"That  old  gentleman  Don  Jaime  gave  me 
the  letter  to,"  said  Patsy,  "  told  me  that  the  priests 
who  live  up  there  are  no  end  of  swells.  They  can't 
'get  in*  on  anything  but  merit,  not  even  royal  pat- 
ronage. They  must  show  that  they  have  the  goods ; 
must  pass  a  stiff  examination.  Each  one  has  his 
separate  establishment,  with  his  own  house  and 
garden  and  servants,  and  draws  a  pension  of  from 
three  to  five  thousand  pesetas  a  year.  Most  of 
them  are  great  *  orators ' ;  they  are  sent  for  from  all 
over  Spain  to  preach,  and  jolly  well  paid  for  it. 
They  always  get  twenty-five  dollars  a  sermon,  and 
have  been  known  to  get  forty!  Spain's  the  place 
for  priests ;  when  I  take  orders  I  shall  come  here  to 
live!" 

The  gypsy  King  met  us  at  the  entrance  of  his 
cave ;  a  swart  hulk  of  a  man,  with  the  voice  of  a  bu  I 
and  bold  piercing  eyes.  Behind  him  stood  his  so  , 
looking  just  as  the  King  must  have  looked  t 
twenty.  The  boy  had  a  mop  of  coarse  black  hair 
—  the  King's  was  iron  gray  —  low  forehead, 
strong  white  teeth,  that  curious  veiled  eye  that  later 
in  life  grows  fierce  and  bright;  body,  hands,  feet, 
exquisitely  turned,  color  a  rich  olive,  the  look  of 
race  that  is  better  than  beauty,  and  the  glow  of 
youth  that  is  best  of  all.  It  was  small  wonder  the 
two  ragged  girls  plaiting  straw  in  the  dust  of  the 
hot  yellow  road  looked  at  him  with  longing  eyes. 

The  door  of  the  cave,  fitted  flat  against  the  hill- 
side, seemed  to  lead  into  the  bowels  of  the  earth. 
The  cave,  literally  scooped  out  of  the  mountain, 
was  divided  into  four  decent  whitewashed  rooms, 
comfortable  and  clean  enough.  We  went  directly 
from  the  road  into  the  largest;  it  was  of  fair  size, 
with  rough  beams  running  across  the  ceiling  and 
with  a  tiled  floor.  We  were  expected;  great  prep- 
arations had  been  made  for  our  visit.  A  row  of 
rush-bottomed  chairs  stood  against  the  wall.  Beau- 
tifully polished  copper  saucepans  of  many  sizes 
were  placed  on  a  shelf,  with  some  wild  peonies  stuck 
in  a  beer  bottle.  I  somehow  fancied  that  the  sauce- 
pans would  be  for  sale  if  we  took  a  fancy  to  them. 
A  small  inner  room,  perfectly  dark,  led  from  the 
living  room*  it  had  a  bed  with  a  white  crocheted 
quilt.  On  me  left  of  the  entrance  was  a  cave  room 
that  served  as  a  kitchen;  on  the  right,  a  sort  of 
property  room, —  where  half  a  dozen  women  and 
girls  with  powdered  faces  and  fresh  flowers  in  their 
hair  were  waiting.  The  eldest,  a  fierce  old  woman 
with  a  beak  like  a  parrot's,  dusted  a  chair  for 
me. 

"This  is  my  house,"  she  said.  Pointing  to  the 
King,  "He  is  my  son,  these  are  all  my  family." 
She  seemed  surprised  at  my  asking  if  there  was 
any  other  cave  as  good  as  hers. 

"No,"  she  said,  "this  is  the  best;  cool  in  summer, 
warm  in  winter,  and  clean,  as  you  can  see." 

The  musicians,  the  King's  son  and  another 
youth  with  oiled  hair  and  clean  new  jackets,  took 
their  places,  twanged  their  guitars  and  the  fiesta 
flamanca  began.  First  a  dance  by  two  women, 
while  the  others  sat  by,  clapping  their  hands,  tap- 
ping with  their  feet,  keeping  time  to  the  music. 

"More  power!"  cried  the  King. 

"Dajp,  dale,"  droned  the  chorus.  The  guitars 
twanged  louder,  the  hand-clapping  redoubled. 
Little  by  little  the  dancers  woke  up.  The  youngest 
woman  was  sixty,  the  oldest  girl  ten.  This  was  a 
little  disappointing  to  Patsy,  though  they  all  did 
their  best  and  gave  us  good  measure.  The  children 
were  evidently  students  being  carefully  trained; 
the  old  women  were  all  good  artists,  and  intent  on 
preserving  and  handing  down  the  traditions  of  their 
art, —  but  the  thing  was  somehow  curiously  aca- 
demic! The  old  mother  took  a  tambourine  from 
the  wall  and  shook  out  the  music  from  it  in  fine 
style.  "Tire  yourselves!"  she  cried.  After  the 
second  dance,  she  handed  a  tray  with  glasses  of 
wine.  Each  succeeding  dance  was  better  than  the 
last.  The  best  of  all  was  the  one  the  old  woman 
gave  us  at  the  end.  Only  once  was  there  an  ap- 
proach to  what  Maria  had  hinted  at.  A  woman 
with  a  bad  face  gave  us  a  Jaleo,  a  gross,  wriggling 
dance  with  unpleasant  contortions  of  the  body, 
wonderful  as  an  exhibition  of  skill  and  strength, 
but  not  quite  decent,  and  lacking  the  grace,  the 
beauty,  and  the  dignity  of  the  old  woman's  per- 
formance. 

"Haven't  we  had  enough?"  said  Patsy,  at  the 
end  of  half  an  hour.  'You  saw  those  men  tip 
the  wink  to  our  coachman  as  we  passed  ?  The 
whole  village  is  on  its  good  behavior.  We  are  not 
to  be  shocked,  annoyed,  or  begged  from;,  it's  all 
put  down  in  the  bill  we  must  pay  the  ruffian  King 
for  protecting  us  from  his  tribe,  preventing  us  from 
seeing  the  real  thing  and  giving  us  this  fake 
show." 

Patsy  was  all  wrong  —  because  he  was  disap- 
pointed in  the  age  of  the  performers !  You  can  see 
a  young  and  handsome  Spanish  dancing  girl  in  any 
music  hall  in  Madrid.  The  gypsy  cave  in  the 
mountainside,  where  the  dancers  of  the  past  and  the 
dancers  of  the  future  meet,  was  worth  a  trip  to 
Granada ! 
Of  course  we  spent  most  of  our  time  in  Granada 
at  the  Alhambra.  Some  things  must  be  experi- 
enced to  be  understood.  Falling  in  love  is  one, 
Niagara  Falls  another,  going  down  a  toboggan 
slide  a  third,  the  Alhambra  a  fourth.  The  old 
simile  of  the  oyster  came  to  mind  as  freshly  as  if 
we  had  invented  it, — just  as  every  pair  of  young 
lovers  imagine  they  have  invented  love !  The  heavy 
walls  are  the  outside  of  the  oyster;  the  fairy  courts 
and  halls  painted  with  the  tints  of  rainbow,  dawn, 
sea,  and  moonlight  are  the  inside  of  the  shell.  The 
pearl  ?  In  the  room  of  the  Two  Sisters  the  winter 
apartment  of  the  sultana,  I  had  a  vision  of  Irving's 
Linderaxa.  I  could  not  remember  how  he  de- 
scribed his  pearl  of  the  harem,  but  the  face  I  saw 
or  dreamed  of  as  I  sat  in  that  fairy  palace  was  the 
fairest  woman's  face  I  ever  saw.  Her  skin  was 
like  warm  ivory,  her  hair  an  aureole  of  flame,  her 
eyes,  gray  stars,  her  smile,  the  smile  of  the  im- 
perishable child. 

I  asked  Patsy  if  he  was  disappointed  in  the  Al- 
hambra. 

"Yes,"  he  said,  "disappointed  the  right  way. 
After  the  Acropolis,  it  is  the  best  thing  I  ever  saw. 
The  lovely  color,  the  movement  of  it  all !  Will  you 
tell  me  how  any  people  could  invent  a  written  lan- 
guage as  decorative  as  this  ? "  We  were  in  one  of 
the  great  halls  looking  at  the  Cuffik  inscriptions 
that  form  one  of  the  most  fascinating  and  character- 
istic of  the  wall  ornamentations. 

"It  is  all  based  on  Persian  art,  but  it  is  even  more 
joyous,  don't  you  think  ?  You  know  the  Koran 
discourages,  if  it  does  not  forbid,  the  representation 
of  any  living  creature  in  art.  That  is  like  the 
'Thou  shalt  make  no  graven  image.'  Man  and 
beast  are  practically  ruled  out  of  Arab  art.  Do  you 
miss  them  ?  I  don't.  After  the  gross  use  of  men 
and  animals, —  remember  the  great  bearded  bull- 
men  of  the  Assyrians,  and  the  hawk  and  cat  headed 
gods  of  Egypt, —  this  endless  variation  of  leaf  and 
flower  and  geometric  design  is  refreshing.  Why  it 
is  like  a  vegetarian  diet  to  a  sailor  man  who  has  had 
scurvy  from  living  on  salt  beef." 

The  guardian,  who  had  long  tracked  us,  here 
buttonholed  J.,  and  poured  out  a  flood  of  familiar 
information.  We  listened  mechanically,  as  he 
talked,  until  he  said  something  we  had  not  heard 
twenty  times  before. 

"Last  week  two  Moors  from  the  Algeciras  Con- 
ference were  here.  I  myself  took  them  about. 
They  showed  no  enthusiasm.  In  this  room  the 
older  one  said  to  me,  *  These  are  sentences  from  the 
Koran,'  as  if  I  did  not  know  that  before!  In  spite 
of  all  their  pretended  indifference,  I  knew  very  well 
what  those  Moors  were  feeling.  It  is  a  very  deceit- 
ful race;  they  always  hide  their  emotions."  The 
guardian  spoke  as  scornfully  of  the  Moors  as  Maria 
had  spoken  of  the  gypsies. 

"Do  you  notice  how  they  all  dislike  what  they 
call  deceit  ?  The  Spaniard  is  a  truthful  person,  and 
honest.  I  don't  know  why  it  is  surprising,  but  after 
some  of  the  countries  we  have  traveled  in,  it  comes 
like  a  shock!"  said  Patsy. 

A  long  straight  path  of  gold  sand  between  two 
lines  of  tall,  black  cypresses  leads  to  the  old  ]\foorish 
garden  of  the  Generalife,  near  the  Alhambra. 
Every  other  tree  is  clipped  square  at  the  top,  the 
alternate  one  towering  to  a  pointed  spire.  There 
is  always  a  sound  of  gliding  waters;  in  the  early 
morning  and  evening,  when  the  birds'  matins  and 
lauds  are  sung,  you  can  hear  the  nightingales  and 
the  merles.  In  the  patio  of  the  cypresses,  under 
the  shade  of  immemorial  trees,  is  a  great  sheet  of 
still  green  water  like  a  vast  chrysophrase,  where 
you  can  study  the  cloud  shadows,  or  your  own 
reflection  —  if  you  are  handsome  —  like  Narcissus, 
or  watch  the  greedy  gudgeon  and  gold  fish  devour 
the  bread  you  throw  them.  We  passed  through  a 
long,  flower-bordered  path  with  a  thicket  of  laurel, 
aloes  and  pomegranate  for  a  background.  A 
hundred  tiny  jets  of  water,  like  white  aigrettes, 
waved  among  the  green,  and  lost  themselves  in  the 
shrubbery.  We  climbed  the  long  Stairway  of  the 
Cascades,  cheered  by  the  babble  of  the  little 
streams  of  water  that  run  down  the  tops  of  the 
balustrade  on  either  side.  In  the  mirador  at  the 
top  we  rested,  and  looked  down  on  the  wonderful 
garden  with  its  terraces,  cedars,  clipped  myrtle 
hedges,  thousand  and  one  fountains. 

"  The  Bankshires  are  only  beginning  here;  in 
Seville  the  rose  madness  was  at  its  height,'*  said 
Patsy.  '  We  have  travelled  with  the  rose;  we 
couldn't  have  managed  better  if  we  had  tried." 

From  the  mirador  you  see  the  Sierras  with  the 
eternal  snow  fields  glistening  on  their  summits. 
"The  Moors  certainly  understood  the  use  of 
water,'*  said  J.  "I  have  never  seen  anything  quite 
so  good  as  this  garden  even  in  Italy.'* 

There  was  music  in  the  air,  the  rushing  sound 
of  water  from  those  melting  snows  cunningly 
led  down  the  mountainside  and  set  here  to 
dance  and  sing,  to  cool  the  heat  and  beguile  the 
leisure  hours  of  long,  hot,  summer  days.  Patsy 
watched  with  fascinated  eyes  a  joyous  saldadore 
of  water  leaping  and  singing  under  the  shade  of 
an  oak. 

"Water  is  to  these  people  of  the  south  what  fire 
is  to  us  northerners,"  he  said.  "They  are  the  two 
living  elements,  and  they  both  dance.  Dancing 
is  the  natural  expression  of  joy  in  life;  it  is  copied 
from  dancing  spray  and  dancing  flame.  David 
was  quite  right  to  dance  before  the  ark.  I  had  a 
Shaker  nurse  who  danced  with  rne  when  I  cried;  I 
suppose  that  is  why  I'm  so  fond  of  it." 

Granada  cathedral  is  so  hemmed  in  with  trump- 
ery little  buildings  that  it  is  impossible  to  get  an 
impression  of  it  as  a  whole.  The  mushroom 
growth  will  have  to  go.  Each  succeeding  tourist 
wave  sweeping  over  Europe,  as  the  Goths  and 
Vandals  swept  before  them,  sweeps  away  some  such 
trash,  and  uncovers  hidden  gems  of  architecture. 
The  interior  of  the  cathedral,  though  over  ornate, 
has  some  splendid  architectural  effects,  and  is  rich 
in  every  sort  of  treasure  ecclesiastical.  I  remember 
a  curious  white  marble  statue  of  the  Virgin  with  a 
black  marble  cloak,  and  a  very  charming  painted 
wood  group  of  St.  Anne,  St.  Joachim  and  Mary, 
a  good  example  of  one  of  the  arts  you  must  come  to 
Spain  to  see.  Painted  wood  statuary,  wrought 
iron  work,  ecclesiastical  embroidery  and  —  danc- 
ing have  all  been  carried  farther  in  Spain  than 
anywhere  else  in  Europe.  Montanes,  Roldan,  and 
Alonzo  Cano,  succeeded  in  making  their  painted 
wood  statues  and  bas-reliefs  as  dignified  as  if  they 
had  worked  in  bronze  or  marble.  Just  as  Luca 
della  Robbia  did  with  terra  cotta.  There  is  a  poly- 
chrome carved  retablo  of  the  Entombment  in 
Seville,  by  Roldan,  that  is  a  true  masterpiece 
of  sculpture.  The  outer  figures  are  modelled 
in  such  high  relief  they  seem  almost  free;  those 
in  the  middle  distance  are  in  ordinary  high 
relief,  the  more  distant  in  low,  almost  flat 
relief;  the  background  is  a  painted  wood  panel. 
This  does  not  sound  encouraging,  but  the  material 
a  masterpiece  is  made  of  is  of  little  consequence; 
it  may  be  wood,  marble,  iron,  gold  or  woven 
wool, — if  a  master  uses  it,  a  masterpiece  is  pro- 
duced. 

As  I  was  sketching  the  wonderful  wrought  iron 
screen  that  shuts  off  the  tombs  from  the  main  part 
of  the  chapel  royal,  I  heard  two  women's  voices: 
'You  have  made  a  mistake,  I  think.  The  tombs 
of  Ferdinand  and  Isabel  are  on  the  right,"  said  an 
alert,  gray-haired  woman. 

"Thank  you;  I  know,"  said  a  clear  young  voice. 
The  last  speaker,  caught  red  handed  in  the  very 
act  of  laying  flowers  on  a  tomb,  was  annoyed. 
She  saw  that  I,  too,  looked  with  disfavor  on  the 
alert  gray-haired  lady  with  the  guidebook,  and  by 
mutual  consent  we  made  acquaintance  beside  the 
tomb  of  Juana  la  Loca,  the  daughter  of  Ferdinand 
and  Isabel,  and  her  husband,  Philippe  le  Bel. 

"Poor  things!"  said  the  girl  who  had  laid  the 
flowers  between  the  two  marble  figures  lying  side 
by  side. 

"  Poor  things !  Tell  me  their  story  if  you  remem- 
ber it." 

"They  were  married  when  Juana  was  seventeen, 
and  Philippe  eighteen.  She  was  very  pretty,  but 
he  was  the  handsomest  man  in  Europe.  They  only 
had  each  other  ten  years;  even  then  they  were  not 
allowed  much  peace!  At  first  they  lived  at  his 
court  in  Brussels  where  they  were  very  happy;  life 
was  not  quite  so  strict  and  straight  laced  as  at  the 
Spanish  Court.  Isabel  was  a  great  queen,  but  I 
don't  think  she  could  have  been  a  nice  mother.  She 
sent  a  priest  to  be  Juana's  confessor,  a  grim  Spanish 
bigot.  Phillippe  laughed  at  him  so  much  that 
Juana  refused  to  confess  to  him.  That  was  the 
beginning  of  all  their  troubles!  The  priest  came 
back  to  Spain  and  told  tales,  set  her  mother  against 
Juana.  When  she  came  home,  to  be  with  her 
mother  when  her  child  was  born,  Isabel  tried  to 
prevent  her  returning  to  her  husband, —  locked 
her  up.  Did  you  ever  hear  of  such  a  thing  ? " 

She  spoke  as  if  it  was  happening  now;  her  face 
was  flushed;  she  clinched  and  unclinched  her 
hand. 

"But  they  couldn't  keep  Juana;  she  was  like  a 
raging  lioness;  they  had  to  let  her  go  back  to  her 
husband.  Then  Isabel  spread  the  report  that  Ju- 
ana was  mad, — and  made  arrangements  in  her  will 
to  prevent  her  ever  reigning.  Juana  wouldn't 
have  cared  about  that;  all  she  wanted  was  to  be  let 
alone,  to  have  a  little  peace  and  happiness  in  her 
life.  After  Isabel's  death,  those  two  poor  things 

made  their  great  mistake,—  they  came  back  to 
Spain.  Somebody  who  was  jealous  of  their  happi- 
ness poisoned  Philippe.  Nobody  knows  whether 
Juana's  father  Ferdinand  was  responsible  for  the 
murder  or  the  Inquisition.  I  think  it  was  the 
Inquisition;  those  cruel  inquisitors  did  not  want 
anybody  to  be  happy,  and  Philippe  was  too  liberal, 
too  open-minded  to  suit  that  terrible  Cardinal 
Jimenez.  Juana  and  Philippe  were  at  Burgos  at 
the  time.  When  it  was  all  over,  the  friends  who 
were  with  her  at  the  deathbed  told  Juana  that  her 
husband  was  dead. 

"No,"  she  said,  "not  dead,  asleep!"  You  see, 
then,  she  really  did  go  mad.  They  had  Philippe 
embalmed  and  put  in  a  leaden  coffin;  from  that 
day  Juana  was  never  separated  from  his  body. 
Wherever  she  went  she  took  it  with  her;  for  twenty 
years  she  travelled  all  over  the  country  with  it.  I 
saw  her  coach,  the  first  that  ever  came  to  Spain,  in 
Madrid.  In  those  days,  when  royalties  travelled, 
they  stopped  at  convents  or  monasteries,  if  there 
was  no  royal  residence  near.  Poor  Juana  was  so 
jealous  she  would  never  go  into  a  convent,  for  fear 
the  nuns  might  look  at  her  beloved!  Philippe  dead 
had  his  pages  and  his  suite  just  as  if  he  had  been 
alive.  Finally,  Juana  was  shut  up  at  Tordesillas. 
There  she  had  the  coffin  placed  in  a  chapel  leading 
from  her  room,  where  she  could  always  see  it. 
Here  is  a  photograph  I  bought  of  Pradilla's  picture 
of  Juana." 

The  picture  shows  the  sad  procession  on  a  wind- 
swept hillside  outside  Burgos  just  before  dawn. 
The  coffin  stands  on  an  iron  bier,  with  two  wax 
candles  at  the  head  and  foot.  A  priest  reads  the 
service  from  his  book.  Juana's  ladies  stand  or  sit 
exhausted  on  the  ground.  A  group  of  pages  and 
gentlemen  in  furred  dresses  stand  near  a  fire  kin- 
dled in  the  open.  Juana,  in  a  long  black  dress, 
stands  beside  the  coffin  looking  down.  "Dead? 
No,  asleep!"  she  seems  to  say. 

"For  forty-seven  years  Juana  watched  beside  the 
body  of  her  husband.  He  died  at  twenty-eight; 
she  lived  to  seventy-four.  Their  son,  Charles  V, 
gave  Juana  as  fine  a  tomb  as  Isabel's.  I  think  she 
deserved  it.  A  great  lover  is  as  rare  as  a  great 
queen.  Come  with  me  and  see  the  vault.  That 
old  battered  coffin  is  Philippe's,  the  very  one  Juana 
carried  about  with  her.  I  touched  it  the  other  day. 
It  made  it  all  seem  so  real! " 

We  were  standing  by  the  royal  vault,  looking 
down  through  a  grating  at  the  coffins,  when  a  fair 
young  man  with  blue  eyes  strolled  through  the 
chapel  and  joined  us. 

"Haven't  you  been  here  long  enough,  Joan?" 
he  said.  "Let's  get  out  of  this  stuffy  old  church." 

"All  ready,  Philip;  I  was  only  waiting  for  you." 

She  looked  at  him  with  adoring  eyes,  smiled  kindly 
at  me,  and  went  off  leaning  on  his  arm.  They 
were  as  pretty  a  young  couple  as  you  could  see,  and 
their  names  were  Philip  and  Joan !  It  could  hardly 
have  been  by  chance  that  they  were  here.  I  fan- 
cied that  the  bride  had  contrived  to  include  a  pil- 
grimage to  the  tomb  of  the  true  lover,  Joan  the 
Mad,  in  their  wedding  journey. 

Amor  es  como  el  vino  Love  is  like  wine; 

guardate  &  tiempo  Guarded  with  time 

y  ie  sabrd  mas  didce  It  shall  taste  to 

thee  sweetest 
cuanto  mas  viejo.  When  it  is  oldest. 


