Chapter VII. CORDOBA 

A  WONDERFUL  moon  lighted  our  departure 
from  Madrid  which  made  the  country,  flat 
and  uninteresting  by  day,  look  almost  beau- 
tiful. 

The  expresses  in  this  country  run  more  smoothly 
than  in  our  own.  The  sleepers  are  lighter  than  our 
heavy  Pullmans  and  there  is  not  that  continual  bump, 
bump,  that  rocks  our  commercial  traveller  to  sleep. 
Nevertheless  there  are  other  drawbacks, — animate  and 
inanimate, — and  it  was  after  a  none  too  restful  night 
that  we  wakened  in  the  pitchy  blackness  of  early  morn- 
ing, which  by  the  time  we  had  pulled  up  at  Cordoba 
had  given  way  to  a  pale  light  in  the  east. 

Rolls  and  coffee  at  the  little  railway  restaurant,  and 
we  can  truthfully  say  we  have  seen  the  sun  rise  upon 
the  glories  of  Spain. 

A  rickety  stage  bumped  us  over  the  uneven  cobbles, 
through  the  narrowest  of  alleys  to  a  very  picturesque 
little  hostelry,  the  Grand  Hotel  Suisse.     C'est  ca. 

We  are  up  in  a  clean-looking  room, — first  point  of 
interest  and  inspection, — across  hall  from  the  patio, 
which  you  must  know  is  a  wonderfully  neat  little  court 
with  often  a  fountain,  plants  and  birds,  whose  marble 
floor  is  washed  by  the  rains  of  heaven. 

The  Prince  of  Bavaria,  incognito,  has  rooms  near  at 
hand  and  on  the  patio,  but  we  overlook  a  city  square 
and,  beneath  our  window,  a  little  yard  wherein  a  don- 
key, made  patient  by  the  eternal  stick,  goes  blindfolded 
on  his  endless  rounds  to  draw  water  for  the  hotel. 

But  here  is  a  bit  of  Spain  of  our  dreams,  quaint,  old, 
vividly  colored,  primitively  rough,  but  clean  and  at- 
tractive. 

In  its  Moorish  characteristics  of  narrow,  winding, 
cobbled  streets,  straight,  blank  walls  at  all  angles, 
whose  infrequent  doors  allow  glimpses  of  the  attract- 
ive patios  within,  its  red  tiled  roofs  and  conglomera- 
tion of  houses,  shops  and  churches,  it  reminds  us  more 
of  Toledo  than  of  any  other  Spanish  city  we  have  seen. 
But  the  resemblance  is  mostly  of  outward  appearance. 

Toledo  has  the  unattractiveness  of  age  without  re- 
juvenation. The  people  seem  as  old  as  the  centuries 
old  buildings ;  it  is  a  town  clinging  desperately  to  the 
glory  of  bygone  days, — a  monument  alone  to  the 
past. 

Here  is  a  city  just  as  ancient  in  its  building,  with 
the  same  inconvenient  labyrinth  of  passages  of  Moor- 
ish fancy  and  a  similiar  confusion  of  buildings,  whose 
population  has  also  shrunk  twenty  fold;  but  a  city 
with  a  reason  for  its  present  being. 

Cordoba  is  the  center  of  a  thriving  agricultural 
country.  The  people  seem  not  merely  to  exist,  but  anx- 
ious to  do  something  for  their  betterment.  There  is  a 
wholesome  atmosphere  here  that  is  totally  lacking  in 
Toledo,  whose  very  stones  seem  to  exude  odors. 

Mr.  T ,  who  has  been  wandering  aimlessly  but 

not  noiselessly  about  the  rooms,  here  breaks  into  the 
train  of  thought :  "  That's  a  mean,  contemptible  trick 
on  that  mule  " ;  which  we  heartily  echo  and  laying  pen 
aside  go  below  and  join  him  in  "  tost  ado,  huevos 
pasado  y  cafe  con  leche."  Our  appetites  are  return- 
ing. 

The  programme  as  laid  down  by  "  El  Sabio," — 
in  American,  the  "  Wise  Guy," — is  to  stop  in  Cordoba 
overnight. 

Now,  as  further  acquaintance  shows,  this  would  not 
have  been  a  hardship.  But  mindful  of  Toledo  and  per- 
haps to  assert  our  Yankee  independence  we  have  re- 
belled and  announced  our  intention  of  proceeding  to 
Sevilla  to-night. 

Overruled  by  our  united  persuasions  and  threats, 
"  El  Sabio  "  is  as  one  without  a  kingdom,  and  his 
gloom  overshadows  all. 

But  come  with  us  on  the  walk  we  took  this  morning. 
Made  undignified  and  maybe  lightheaded  by  our  early 
rising,  our  whistling  awoke  the  echoes  of  the  walled 
canons  of  streets  and  set  every  dog  barking  around  the 
corners. 

The  amazed  populace  gazed  in  astonishment  at  our 
choruses,  but  the  frown  of  Benunes,  which  nothing 
could  dispel,  checked  all  familiarity  but  our  own. 

Up,  down  and  around  we  went,  to  the  appropriate 
tune  of  "  Up  the  Street,"  looking  at  balconies,  peering 
unashamed  in  at  patios, — "  muy  benitoing  "  anyone 
who  appeared,  and  finally  coming  unexpectedly  upon 
a  large,  crowded  market  in  the  full  swing  of  early 
morning  activity. 

Cuts  of  meat,  strange-looking  herbs,  vegetables  and 
fruit  of  all  descriptions,  loaded  the  counters  and  stalls 
with  their  attractive  displays. 

Such  an  economical  way  they  have  of  distributing 
milk, — and  the  poor  goats  seem  to  know  where  to  go 
and  just  when  to  stop. 

Soon,  in  front  of  us,  after  perplexing  winding  and 
twisting,  appeared  the  moss-grown  and  age-colored 
walls  of  the  Mezquita,  surmounted  by  the  brown  bel- 
fry tower  at  one  end  and  the  dome  of  the  Cathedral 
in  the  center. 

Mosque  and  Cathedral;  no  wonder  you  pause. 

For  here  is  an  unique  example  of  history's  progress 
and  of  race  succeeding  race. 

Hither  to  this  land  of  promise  came  the  Moors  one 
thousand  odd  years  ago,  dominating  the  fading  Visi- 
goths. Being  an  energetic  and  thrifty  people  and 
finding  fulfillment  of  the  promise,  they  prospered  and 
builded  them  here  a  Mecca  city  of  their  travels  and  a 
wondrous  temple  of  worship. 

Four  centuries  later  the  Christian  Spaniards,  push- 
ing ever  southward  their  victorious  march,  expelled  the 
Moslems  and  within  their  gigantic  temple — in  its  very 
center — erected  a  Cathedral  to  their  own  religion. 

As  we  entered  from  the  street,  our  first  view  was  of 
the  patio  planted  with  rows  of  orange  trees  and  royal 
palms,  and  it  seemed  as  if  at  the  same  time  we  had 
stepped  into  another  country  and  another  age. 

Unconsciously  your  voice  sinks  to  a  whisper;  the 
question  halts  on  your  lips. 

With  the  fading  fragrance  of  the  orange  trees  you 
breathe  the  atmosphere  of  the  ancient  days. 

You  lurk  behind  a  column  and  look  out  upon  the 
patio  bathed  in  the  glare  of  a  mid-summer  sun. 

The  fountains  are  playing  and  above  the  splash  of 
the  waters  you  hear  the  shrill  singing  of  the  birds  in 
the  lofty  palms. 

A  motley  throng  crowds  the  generous  space,  grouped 
about  the  fountains,  loitering  beneath  the  palm  shade 
or  strolling  in  the  cool  shadow  of  the  walls. 

The  Moslems  are  gathered  to  gossip  before  their 
hour  of  prayer. 

From  many  a  turban  glints  a  royal  jewel;  the  simple 
clothes  are  costly,  the  swords  richly  gemmed. 

From  the  streets  comes  the  murmur  of  the  multi- 
tude, for  Cordoba  is  in  the  height  of  Moorish  power. 

Listen !  A  deep  bell  tolls.  A  voice  cries  to  Allah ; 
all  forms  are  bent;  then  rising,  the  devout  dip  their 
fingers  in  the  holy  water  of  the  fountains  and  move 
slowly  to  the  open  ports  of  the  Mezquita,  and  as  their 
shuffling  footsteps  are  lost  beyond  the  colonnades  of 
the  Mosque,  you  rub  your  eyes  and  look  out  again 
upon  the  scene  of  to-day. 

The  patio  is  surrounded  by  the  extended  walls  of 
the  Mosque  forming  with  the  outer  wall  a  covered  walk. 
That  at  the  end  has  been  closed  up  and  from  its  cen- 
ter rises  the  belfry  tower  on  the  ruins  of  the  Moorish 
minaret,  begun  by  the  Spaniards  in  1593. 

In  the  patio,  whose  very  atmosphere  seems  yet  to 
hold  the  ancient  suggestion  of  repose  and  rest,  are 
five  fountains  interspersed  among  the  trees,  around 
whose  edges  groups  of  children  and  men  and  women 
lent  color  and  a  present  day  realism  to  the  old  world 
scene. 

The  original  entrances  to  the  Mosque  were  direct 
from  the  patio,  corresponding  to  the  spaces  between 
the  rows  of  trees,  but  of  these  all  except  two  have  been 
closed  up. 

Our  entrance  into  the  building  itself  afforded  us  a 
surprise  from  which  we  have  hardly  yet  recovered.  In- 
deed, it  is  difficult  to  transmit  an  intelligent  picture  of 
the  vista  seemingly  endless  beneath  the  low,  graceful 
roof. 

The  fluted  ceiling  of  the  Mezquita  is  not  high,  ris- 
ing in  successive  light-admitting  domes  to  perhaps 
forty  feet  from  the  tiled  floor. 

Supporting  it  is  a  veritable  forest  of  marble  col- 
umns in  rows  of  perfect  regularity  from  any  point  of 
view,  while  from  their  capitals  rise  gracefully  double 
arches  crossed  with  alternate  bands  of  red  brick  and 
white  sandstone. 

Indescribable  is  the  effect  of  this  apparently  endless 
perspective  of  marble  shafts,  relieved  by  the  bright 
colors  of  the  arches,  crossing  and  interlacing  in  be- 
wildering fashion. 

We  counted  in  one  direction,  thirty-six  columns, 
thirteen  and  one-half  feet  apart,  and  in  the  other,  half 
as  many  columns  twice  as  far  apart,  which,  roughly 
estimated,  gives  an  area  to  the  completed  structure 
of  about  five  hundred  feet  square  or  nearly  six  acres. 

When  I  tell  you  that  the  Cathedral  in  its  center  ap- 
pears lost  and  the  private  chapels  on  the  walls  look  like 
decorated  cells,  you  will  have  some  idea  of  the  im- 
mensity of  the  Mezquita. 

This  Christian  choir  and  high  altar, — of  wonderful 
beauty  themselves, — with  which  the  Catholic  Spaniards 
sought  to  drive  out  any  suggestion  of  the  Khoran,  ef- 
faced, as  well,  the  full  effect  of  the  interior.  Permis- 
sion to  erect  this  Cathedral  was  sought  of  Charles  V. 
who,  not  understanding  the  situation,  granted  it 
against  the  protests  of  the  Council  of  Cordoba,  but 
when  completed  and  the  Mosque  with  the  Cathedral  in 
its  center  was  seen  for  the  first  time  by  the  monarch, 
he  is  said  to  have  exclaimed,  "  You  have  built  what 
you  might  have  built  anywhere,  but  you  have  de- 
stroyed something  that  was  unique  in  the  world." 

There  was  said  to  have  been  one  thousand  columns 
when  the  last  Moorish  ruler  of  Cordoba  had  added  the 
finishing  touches  to  this  Moslem  temple,  but  the  Chris- 
tians removed  one  hundred  and  forty-eight  to  make 
room  for  the  Cathedral. 

Whether  intentionally  or  not,  although  ruler  suc- 
ceeded ruler  during  its  construction,  the  completed 
Mezquita  formed  a  perfect  square — without  reckoning 
the  space  occupied  by  the  patio. 

We  first  made  a  complete  circuit  of  the  building  to 
get  some  conception  of  its  wonderful  extent  and  later 
began  to  notice  details. 

As  the  structure  was  begun,  added  to,  and  com- 
pleted at  different  periods,  the  columns  on  closer  in- 
spection bear  slightly  different  appearances,  while  the 
varying  capitals  indicate  a  desire  or  necessity  for  re- 
lief from  monotony. 

All  of  the  eight  hundred  and  fifty-two  remaining 
columns  indicate,  by  their  polished  bases,  the  multi- 
tudes of  worshippers  that  must  have  brushed  by  them 
through  the  centuries. 

One  column  was  pointed  out  as  coming  from  Athens ; 
another  from  Turkey.  Some  were  said  to  have  come 
from  the  ruins  of  Carthage — but  the  most  were 
brought  from  the  quarries  of  Andalusia. 

On  one  of  the  marble  columns,  by  the  light  of  a 
match,  we  saw  a  small  cross  said  to  have  been  scratched 
by  the  nail  of  a  prisoner  during  the  years  of  his  captiv- 
ity ;  while  in  another,  considerable  holes  had  been  worn 
by  the  fingers  of  millions  of  the  devout. 

We  saw  two  Mihrabs,  or  Khoran  rooms.  One, — 
Mihrab  Segundo, — although  partly  filled  up  by  the 
early  Spaniards,  yet  showed  the  beautiful  inlaid  tiling 
on  the  walls  surmounted  by  the  most  intricate  carving 
and  ending  in  a  dome  supported  by  massive  carved 
arches  rising  to  the  center — four  on  each  of  the  four 
sides. 

The  other  Mihrab,  or  Holy  of  Holies,  is  a  marvel- 
lously ornamented  room. 

The  arched  entrance  has  rich,  glazed  mosaic,  shin- 
ing like  gold  after  these  many  centuries.  This  room 
— only  thirteen  feet  across, — has  marble  walls  sur- 
mounted by  a  dome  of  one  piece  of  white  marble,  say 
ten  feet  across  and  eight  high,  carved  in  the  shape  of 
a  shell. 

A  regular  pathway  was  worn  in  the  marble  floor 
by  the  bare  feet  or  knees  of  the  many  penitents,  who 
made  the  seven  times  circuit  of  the  room  in  pursuance 
of  their  form  of  worship. 

The  room  giving  entrance  to  this  is  larger  and  is 
rich  in  an  almost  inconceivable  beauty  of  carving  and 
mosaic. 

In  succeeding  to  their  place  of  worship  the  early 
Christian  Spaniards  endeavored  to  efface  as  well  any 
Moslem  suggestion  in  ornamentation  or  decoration. 
Doorways  and  archways  were  blocked  up.  Walls  were 
plastered  over,  ruthlessly  covering  the  beauties  beneath. 

The  work  of  restoration  which  has  been  proceeding 
in  leisurely  Spanish  fashion  for  the  past  twenty  years, 
is  constantly  disclosing  some  new  and  unsuspected 
beauty  in  design  or  delicate  carving. 

We  observed  workmen  removing  the  plaster  from 
delicate  windows  carved  from  the  stone  and  from  rich 
mosaics  whose  colors  were  apparently  unchanged. 

The  original  ceiling  of  carved  wood  is  only  preserved 
in  part,  but  is  being  replaced,  following  the  former 
pattern.  In  one  place  where  the  work  was  proceeding, 
some  of  the  old  boards  and  beams,  with  the  carving 
still  showing,  were  employed  to  hold  up  the  rubbish 
caused  by  the  workmen. 

While  the  old  designs  and  forms  are  being  imitated 
in  this  work  of  restoration,  yet  the  effect  of  originality 
and  of  age  does  not  seem  to  be  strongly  imparted  and 
strengthens  us  in  the  thought  earlier  expressed  that 
to  see  ancient  Spain  one  should  lose  no  time  in  coming 
to  it. 

The    Cathedral, — or    more    strictly    speaking    the 
choir,  high  altar  and  space  between, — is  of  surpassing 
beauty.  The  choir  is  of  mahogany  from  South  Amer- 
ica, showing  the  most  wonderful  hand  carving  that 
perchance  can  be  seen  in  Spain. 

On  the  backs  of  the  seats, — in  the  Hicea  Chorus, — 
are  carved  in  succession  biblical  scenes  from  the  begin- 
ning of  the  world. 

This  work  and  the  large  figures  at  the  back  of  the 
choir  are  wonderfully  done. 

In  the  racks  before  the  choir,  as  at  Toledo,  were 
books  hundreds  of  years  old,  richly  illuminated  by 
hand,  that  were  in  daily  use. 

The  high  altar  of  red  marble  presents  an  imposing 
and  at  the  same  time  a  beautiful  appearance,  while  over 
the  space  between  rises  a  massive  dome  to  the  fullest 
height  of  the  main  structure,  although  not  as  high  as 
the  belfry  tower  on  the  outer  patio  wall. 

In  the  treasury  room, — near  the  former  Moorish 
Holy  of  Holies, — we  saw  a  silver  and  gold  Custodia 
seven  feet  high  which,  with  a  pedestal  three  feet  more, 
required,  it  is  said,  fifty  men  to  carry  it  in  the  annual 
processional. 

There  was  also  a  solid  silver  statue  of  the  Concep- 
tion, three  feet  high,  a  cup  made  from  the  first  gold 
which  Columbus  brought  from  America,  according  to 
Benunes — he  must  have  brought  a  ship  full, — and  the 
sword  of  San  Fernando  who  freed  Cordoba  from  Moor- 
ish control  in  the  early  thirteenth  century. 

The  immense  Mezquita, — second  in  size  only  to  the 
Kaaba  of  Mecca  among  all  the  Mosques  of  the  Moors, 
— gives  a  strong  suggestion  of  the  height  of  power 
and  wealth  to  which  they  attained  in  Spain  during  the 
few  centuries  of  their  occupancy. 

It  is  said  that  Cordoba  was  once  a  city  of  a  million 
inhabitants,  and  countless  indeed  must  have  been  the 
throngs  that  frequented  this  temple  through  Moorish 
rule. 

Around  the  city,  in  parts,  are  the  remains  of  the  old 
walls  to  whose  building  Roman,  Goth,  Moor  and  Span- 
iard each  contributed  his  share  as  the  strong,  new  race 
succeeded  the  weakening  old. 

The  bridge  across  the  Quadalaquivir  (pronounced 
Quadalakeeveer)  still  retains  most  of  the  original 
Roman  foundations  of  two  thousand  years  ago,  and 
some  of  the  later  upper  works  of  the  Moors.  The  re- 
pairs that  are  just  now  being  made  are,  however,  ef- 
fectually destroying  the  appearance  of  great  age.  All 
this  is  very  distressing  to  our  friend  Befiunes,  who  can- 
not see  why  Spain  should  not  remain  as  a  show  place 
for  the  rest  of  the  world. 

A  little  further  down  the  river,  a  few  old  Moorish 
water  mills  stretch  across  the  stream,  while  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  town  are  several  ancient  churches. 

As  we  lingered  by  the  old  gate,  guarding  the  en- 
trance from  the  bridge,  the  rain  began  to  fall  with 
tropical  violence. 

Dispatching  a  boy  for  a  carriage,  we  sought  shelter 
meanwhile  in  a  near-by  shop  whose  windows  were  filled 
with  local  postal  pictures. 

As  we  entered  the  doorway,  a  heated  discussion  at- 
tracted our  attention.     Through  the  steady  musketry 
of  Spanish,  now  and  then  broke  an  expostulation  in 
English. 

"  But,  my  good  man,  here  is  your  money,"  cried  a 
familiar  voice. 

"  Muy  malo,  muy  rnalo,"  said  another. 

"  Well,  HI  make  it  fifteen." 

"  No  entiendo" 

Laughingly  we  bade  Benunes  help  him  out,  and 
glad  indeed  was  Mr.  Driscoll  to  shift  the  burden. 

If  we  must  confess  it,  we  have  ourselves  ingloriously 
called  upon  Benunes  when  anger  with  some  pilfering 
shopkeeper  had  made  our  halting  speech  too  slow  a  ve- 
hicle for  the  expression  of  our  feelings. 

The  dilemma  into  which  our  friend  had  now  fallen 
was  a  common  one.  His  money  was  bad,  while  the  re- 
quirements of  the  language  demanded  to  clear  up  the 
situation  had  gone  far  beyond  the  ability  to  point 
at  a  picture  and  read  the  shopkeeper's  fingers. 

Our  carriage  arriving,  we  all  bundled  in  and  rode 
across  the  old  Roman  bridge. 

Ah,  what  tales  those  old  ramparts  and  walls  might 
tell! 

From  them  Roman  watched  the  Goth  approach,  a 
mid,  fearless,  overwhelming  host,  sweeping  the  city 
like  a  wave  of  destruction. 

Generations  later,  a  cloud  appeared  from  the  south 
and  the  Moslem  gained  sway,  and  now  the  Spaniard 
sleeps  fearless  in  perennial  peace. 

All  the  world,  north  and  south  of  him,  is  civilized 
and  knows  itself. 

Race  has  met  race,  intermingled  and  run  its  course. 
No  dream  of  a  new  world's  riches  leavens  the  pagan 
horde  and  endangers  the  barren  domain  of  the  indolent 
Don.  Undistraught  by  foreign  foe,  may  he  fade  among 
his  ruins,  proud  of  his  country's  past  greatness,  care- 
less of  her  future  destiny. 

The  streets  in  Cordoba — so  called  for  politeness' 
sake — are  simply  accidental  spaces  between  house 
walls,  and  have  no  apparent  sense  of  direction  or  pur- 
pose. Their  intertwining  forms  a  labyrinth  difficult  to 
solve.  Nevertheless,  I  thought  that  I  could  find  my 
way  about,  and  when  Senor  Benunes  had  retired  with 
his  disappointment  for  an  hour's  siesta,  I  led  forth  an 
expedition  to  view  the  Paseo  del  Gran  Capitan  and 
other  points  of  interest. 

Returning,  we  followed  a  roundabout  way, — just  to 
prove  our  mastery  of  the  situation, — and  I  still  believe 
that  I  could  have  reached  that  hotel  in  time,  although 
possibly   Mr.    T has    ideas    to   the   contrary,   to 

which  some  strength  may  have  been  added  by  inglorious 
recourse  to  several  Cordobians.  I  have  at  least  this 
satisfaction, — it  required  the  guidance  of  more  than 
one  to  get  us  back. 

While  I  have  been  alternately  writing  and  running 
to  the  window  to  plead  with  the  miserable  old  donkey- 
beater  below,  who  always  stopped  just  as  I  got  there, 

Mr.  T ,  under  the  safe  guidance  of  the  refreshed 

and  happier  "  El  Sabio,"  has  visited  that  gentleman's 
club  which,  built  some  years  previously  for  the  exer- 
cise of  the  national  habit,  is  described  by  Mr.  T 
as  one  of  the  largest  and  most  attractive  he  has  ever 
seen.  It  is  in  the  form  of  a  square,  with  the  inevitable 
but  beautiful  patio  in  the  center,  surrounded  on  all 
sides  by  card  and  refreshment  rooms. 

Chapter VIII. SEVILLA 

LAST  evening  after  we  left  Cordoba,  we  passed 
an  old  Moorish  castle  standing  picturesque 
J  and  grim  on  a  high  rock  at  the  right  of  the 
track.  The  moon,  showing  fitfully  between 
scurrying  clouds,  brought  out  the  bold  battlements 
and  commanding  turrets.  Surely  romance  and  trag- 
edy had  their  home  behind  those  dark  walls  and  frown- 
ing towers  which,  after  the  Moors  had  gone,  sheltered 
the  marauding  brigands. 

It  brought  to  my  mind, — albeit  the  railroad  spoiled 
the  picture, — the  fascination  of  Lorna  Doone's  child- 
hood home. 

Soon  there  were  vivid  lightning  and  peals  of  thun- 
der and  we  arrived  at  Sevilla  in  a  pouring  rain. 

This  Hotel  de  Madrid  is  very  "  quaint "  and  by  the 
same  token  not  so  comfortable,  although  hardly  to  be 
complained  of.  It  has  two  patios,  one  right  in  front 
of  the  entrance,  filled  with  good-sized  palms  and  other 
tropical  vegetation. 

In  truth  it  is  an  old  Moorish  palace  transformed 
into  a  modern  hotel.  The  mosaic  work  is  still  in  evi- 
dence, particularly  in  the  dining-room.  Beyond  this 
are  the  baths,  but  how  one  can, — well,  I  guess  one 
can't. 

The  weather,  with  the  frequent  showers  and  brilliant 
sunshine,  is  much  like  our  spring,  or  so  we  thought  as 
we  drove  this  morning  across  the  Puente  de  Isabel  II., 
spanning  the  Quadalaquivir,  here  become  more  broad, 
to  the  gypsy  quarters  on  the  other  side,  called  Triana. 

Recrossing,  we  skirted  the  left  bank  of  the  river, 
navigable  to  the  sea  forty-five  miles  away  and  crowded 
with  ancient  feluccas  lying  side  by  side  with  iron 
tramps. 

Presently,  we  passed  the  Tower  of  Gold  with  its  un- 
derground passage  to  the  palace  whither  Columbus,  re- 
turning from  his  second  voyage  to  America,  stealthily 
crept  so  that  Isobella  might  be  the  first  in  Europe  to 
hear  his  wondrous  tales  of  the  new  country. 

To  the  left,  partly  hidden  by  adjacent  roofs,  we 
saw  the  ruined  Tower  of  Silver,  but  its  purpose  or  his- 
tory our  guide  could  not  tell. 

Passing  the  palatial  residence  of  the  former  Due 
de  Montpensier, — Palacio  Santelmo, — we  drove  by  the 
beautiful  gardens  attached  to  the  estate  whose  fur- 
ther half  has  been  given  to  the  people  of  Sevilla. 

Here  were  a  profusion  of  royal  palms,  acacias, 
eucalypti,  orange  trees,  mandarins,  and  all  sorts  of 
flowers  in  bloom. 

Coming  back  through  the  narrow  streets  we  were 
shortly  confronted  by  the  old  walls  and  the  towering 
Giralda  of  the  Cathedral,  one  of  the  largest  and  most 
beautiful  in  all  Christendom,  second  only  in  size  to  St. 
Peter's  in  Rome. 

This  tower  of  the  Giralda  represents, — like  many 
another  Spanish  building, — several  epochs  in  Spain's 
history.     The  foundations  are  still  of  the  old  Roman 
construction,  its  main  tower  of  Moorish  build  and  its 
upper  part  and  belfry  of  later  Spanish  origin. 

We  drove  completely  around  it  fascinated  by  the 
views  from  each  side.  The  Giralda  is  copied  in  the 
tower  at  Madison  Square,  but  our  building  with  its 
higher  tower  seems  of  better  proportions. 

Through  the  narrow  alleys,  our  carriage  barely 
clearing  the  house  walls  on  either  side,  we  proceeded 
through  the  former  Jewish  quarters,  the  blank  walls 
suggesting  little  of  the  attractive  interiors  of  which 
the  open  doorways  gave  occasional  meagre  glimpses. 

Our  guide  enjoys  nothing  better — bull-fights  ex- 
cepted— than  giving  us  some  surprise,  and  our  won- 
dering approbation  is  in  part  his  reward. 

Halting  the  carriage  before  a  plain  exterior, — pal- 
aces or  stables  present  the  same  outward  appearance, 
— we  entered  a  house  built  after  the  plan  of  that  of 
Pontius  Pilate.  First  there  was  a  small  patio,  from 
which  we  entered  a  larger  one,  paved  with  marble  flags 
and  richly  decorated  on  all  sides  by  marvellous  mosaics 
and  carving. 

Built  three  hundred  years  ago  it  gives  no  indication 
of   age. 

In  every  room,  in  every  hall,  corridor  and  stairway, 
are  those  beautiful  mosaics,  appearing  at  a  little  dis- 
tance like  hanging  Persian  rugs. 

The  ambassadors'  hall  has  modern,  stained-glass 
windows  which  are  entirely  out  of  harmony  with  the 
rest  of  the  place  yet  lend  a  weird  appearance  to  the 
patio  without. 

From  the  roof  a  good  view  is  obtained  of  the  Gi- 
ralda,  but  this  is  a  common  sight  from  any  point  in 
Sevilla  and  serves  as  a  sure  land-mark  to  the  confused 
traveller. 

So  imbued  had  we  become  with  the  dominating  Span- 
ish characteristic  of  cruelty,  that  the  curious  little 
institution  we  next  visited  afforded  a  pleasing  sur- 
prise. 

Stopping  in  an  ordinary-looking  street,  Befiunes 
called  our  attention  to  a  hole  in  the  wall. 

Ringing  a  near-by  bell,  we  were  admitted  by  a  trim- 
looking  sister  of  charity  to  the  foundlings'  home,  sup- 
ported by  the  contributions  of  the  ladies  of  Sevilla. 

And  now  we  saw  the  subtle  reason  for  the  hole  in  the 
wall. 

Unnoticed  and  unashamed,  as  silent  as  the  stork's 
visit,  the  disconsolate  mothers  place  the  little  ones  on 
the  soft  bed  within,  whose  tiny  weight  rings  a  bell  and 
automatically  turns  them  forever  from  their  parent's 
ken. 

Upstairs,  in  their  little  cots,  were  a  score  or  more, 
and  in  another  room  a  lot  of  youngsters  were 
busily  eating  at  long  benches,  happy  and  well 
cared  for. 

In  all,  the  house  gives  refuge  for  a  hundred  or  so, 
affording  a  cleanly  and  well-ordered  home  under  the 
efficient  care  of  the  sisters  of  charity. 

Indeed  it  was  a  touching  sight,  exposing  a  rather 
unexpected  side  of  the  Spanish  character. 

We  had  lunch  in  the  quaint,  old  dining-room  of  the 
Hotel  de  Madrid,  looking   out    onto    the  little   patio 
with  its  palms  freshened  by  a  recent  rain. 

One  gets  no  suggestion  of  the  interiors,  from  the 
outward  appearance  of  a  Spanish  building,  especially 
where  it  is  of  Moorish  style.  The  blankest  walls  hide 
often  a  reposeful  charm  which  suggests,  in  crossing  the 
threshold,  that  one  has  stepped  into  another  land. 
Evidently  the  builder  had  less  thought  for  his  neighbor 
than  for  his  own  menage. 

There  are  all  sides  to  Spanish  life  and  character — 
and  we  are  here  to  read. 

This  afternoon  we  attended  for  a  very  brief  time 
that  disgusting  spectacle  called  a  cock-fight. 

This  was  held  in  a  roofed-over  court  of  an  ordinary- 
looking  house,  which,  in  the  evening,  serves  as  a  music 
hall  for  the  poorer  classes  of  Sevilla. 

Many  of  the  men,  who  thronged  the  seats  encir- 
cling the  raised  ring,  were  clothed  in  white  butchers' 
aprons,  but  as  the  affair  progressed  we  found  that  we 
could  not  thereby  be  sure  of  their  calling. 

As  the  weather  was  threatening  the  usual  weekly 
bull-fight  was  postponed,  giving  us  the  opportunity  to 
look  over  the  ring  closely. 

This  one  at  Sevilla  is  quite  a  pretentious  affair,  hav- 
ing seating  capacity  for  fully  fourteen  thousand  peo- 
ple. From  a  roof,  we  could  look  down  at  the  bulls 
penned  below  in  little  stalls  whose  doors  were  opened 
by  ropes  leading  above. 

We  are  told  of  the  incredible  fortunes  acquired  by 
the  matadors  of  reputation.  Some  invest  their  earn- 
ings in  real  estate,  while  others  purchase  public  houses 
and  attract  trade  in  proportion  to  the  height  attained 
in  their  earlier  profession. 

Take  away  cock-fighting  and  bull-fighting  and  they 
say  you  would  quickly  kill  the  Spaniard.  Prize-fight- 
ing is  thought  too  disgusting  to  a  people  who,  with 
tranquil  face,  unruffled  by  passion,  lash  their  worn-out 
draught  animals.  The  blows  of  their  sticks  eternally 
beat  upon  your  ears  and  make  your  blood  boil.  And 
when  the  poor  animals  outlive  their  usefulness  and  ser- 
vice, they  are  fated  for  the  bull-ring.  It  hardly  adds 
to  your  pleasure  when  you  realize  that  the  poor  cob 
taking  you  to  your  hotel  or  about  the  city,  will  shortly 
meet  his  cruel  end  before  the  yelling  crowd.  When 
the  bulls  prove  more  dangerous  than  expected  and  kill 
off  all  the  horses  provided  as  a  part  of  the  sport,  it 
often  happens  that  others  are  taken  literally  from  the 
shafts  as  they  wait  about  the  Plaza  de  Toros  so  that 
the  crowd  may  have  its  surfeit  of  blood  and  gore. 

It  is  not  only  complete  disregard  of  the  sufferings 
of  dumb  animals  that  contributes  to  the  Spanish  char- 
acter of  brutality,  but  they  seem  also  fiendishly  to 
plan  their  torture. 

A  welcome  contradiction  of  the  universal  attribute 
of  cruelty  is  the  little  home  of  the  foundlings,  planned 
and  conducted  in  loving  fashion. 

The  few  books  on  Spain  that  I  have  looked  into 
picture  it  as  an  ideal  country — a  land  of  golden 
dreams.    They  rave  over  the  beauties  of  barren  land- 
scape  and  time-worn  town;  paint  its  romances  and 
romance  about  its  painters ;  draw  wonderful,  misty 
portraits  of  its  wealth  and  grandeur. 

Don't  believe  them. 

We  have  come  straight  through  the  heart  of  Spain, 
and  clear  almost  to  its  southern  coast  it  is  a  wasted 
land  and  a  wasted  people.  For  the  most  part,  the 
sombre  barrenness  of  Don  Quixote's  pathway  is  to  my 
mind  the  truest  expression  of  it  all. 

If  ever  there  was  a  people  who  felt  the  oppression 
of  aristocracy  and  church,  it  is  the  poor  people  of 
Spain.  Everywhere  throughout  this  country  you  will 
find  the  grandest  monuments  in  the  world  to  State, 
church  and  the  individual.  If  you  wish  to  learn  who 
really  paid  for  them  you  have  but  to  look  at  the  pale, 
degenerated  faces  about  you. 

Your  instant  comparison  is  Russia.  But  here  the 
people  seem  to  be  broken  and  hopeless  under  the  yoke. 

Remember  that  this  picture  which  I  have  drawn  from 
our  observations  is  of  the  center  of  Spain.  On  the 
coast  line,  where  touch  is  had  with  other  peoples  and 
where  the  fertile  land  more  easily  yields  an  existence, 
better  conditions  are  found.  This,  as  we  have  already 
observed,  is  true  in  the  independent  Basque  Provinces. 
It  is  true  also  of  the  Mediterranean  provinces,  which 
are  giving  evidences  of  an  inclination  to  remove  them- 
selves from  the  control  of  an  aristocracy,  to  whose  sup- 
port they  are  large  contributors. 

In  Cataluna,  indeed,  freedom  has  already  been 
asked. 

The  story  goes  that  their  council  queried,  "How 
much  is  the  annual  tax  expected  from  us  ?  "  and  when 
told  25,000,000  pesetas  they  are  said  to  have  re- 
plied, "  We  will  give  30,000,000,  but  grant  us  our 
independence." 

At  the  time  of  Alfonso's  recent  visit  to  Saragossa 
and  to  Barcelona,  local  flags  so  predominated  over  the 
royal  colors  that  an  actual  conflict  between  the  King's 
guard  and  the  native  Catalonians  was  narrowly 
averted. 

There  the  people  are  building  their  salvation  on  the 
foundation  of  their  own  individual  efforts.  And  here 
around  Sevilla,  the  conditions  should  be  the  same.  The 
country  is  the  best  we  have  seen  south  of  the  Pyrenees. 
The  faces  are  indeed  of  a  better  and  more  hopeful  type, 
but  again  the  single  ownership  is  the  rule  as  in  the 
north. 

A  past  greatness  seems  to  have  carried  its  impression 
through  the  ages,  which  is  altogether  lost  when  one 
comes  actually  face  to  face  with  the  people  of  Spain 
of  to-day. 

The  wonderful  climate  of  Andalusia  I  am  ready  to 
believe  in.  The  days  so  far  have  been  springlike,  with 
the  unexpected  downpours  followed  instantly  by  the 
bluest  of  skies  and  the  brightest  sunshine. 

This  morning  was  clear  and  invigorating,  and  feel- 
ing the  inclination  to  get  away  from  the  indolence  that 
seems  to  enwrap  the  country  I  took  Albert  for  com- 
pany and  proceeded  to  Giralda. 

There  are  no  steps  up  the  main  tower,  only  inclines 
running  on  each  of  the  four  sides,  which  make  the 
ascent  comparatively  easy. 

We  reached  the  belfry  in  exactly  three  minutes  and 
then  went  higher  for  a  better  view.  The  outlook  from 
the  top  certainly  warrants  the  climb. 

Near  at  hand,  the  Quadalaquivir  winds  a  dirty  yel- 
low and  becomes  a  glistening  ribbon  where  it  is  lost 
in  the  distance.  Below  us  are  the  domes  and  countless 
spires  of  the  Cathedral;  beyond  are  the  age-colored 
walls  of  the  Moorish  palace,  the  Royal  Alcazares, 
which  took  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  in  the  build- 
ing. 

Still  further, — in  the  same  direction, — is  the  huge 
and  more  modern  structure  where  six  thousand  women 
and  girls  roll  cigarettes  and  cigars  for  this  narcotic 
race. 

To  the  right  of  the  tobacco  factory  lies  the  Palacio 
Santelmo,  and  beyond  it  the  waving  green  vista  of  its 
gardens  and  the  public  park. 

Following  the  bank  of  the  river  above  the  squat 
Tower  of  Gold,  appears  the  Plaza  de  Toros  set  like  a 
ring  in  the  landscape. 

But  it  is  the  view  from  the  other  side  of  the  Gi- 
ralda  that  makes  the  sight  unique. 

As  your  glance  sweeps  rapidly  over  the  city  at  your 
feet,  you  are  reminded  of  the  pattern  of  a  crazy  quilt. 
The  groundwork  is  of  white,  relieved  by  the  occasional 
walls  of  blue  and  the  yellow,  green  and  brown  of  the 
moss-covered  tiles. 

Here  and  there,  the  brown  domes  and  spires  of  the 
ancient  churches  spring  above  the  monotony  of  the 
roof  levels.  From  the  Plaza  Nueva  and  an  odd  patio 
or  so  the  fronds  of  royal  palms  add  freshness  to  the 
scene. 

The  panorama  is  wonderful  and  holds  you  entranced, 
while  your  imagination  follows  the  suggestion  of  aged 
wall  and  turret. 

Into  our  musing  broke  the  sound  of  a  big  bell  and 
through  its  measured  cadence  sprang  the  rioting  of 
a  higher  tone. 

We  hurried  down  the  few  steps  to  the  belfry  land- 
ing, and  marvelled  at  the  perfect  time  of  the  deep 
tones  rung  by  an  old  blind  man,  while  the  athletic 
stunts  of  the  young  fellow  who  set  the  smaller  bell 
whirling  on  its  axis  were  a  wonder  to  behold. 

Exchanging  adios  with  the  pair,  we  descended  the 

tower  and  joined  Mr.  T and  "  El  Sabio  "  at  the 

Puerta  del  Perdon,  which  gives  entrance  to  the  court- 
yard of  the  Cathedral,  and  followed  them  into  the 
structure. 

Having  seen  some  of  Spain's  most  remarkable  edi- 
fices, we  were,  nevertheless,  impressed  with  the  noble 
area  of  this  Cathedral  of  Sevilla,  the  second  largest  in 
Europe  and  only  a  trifle  smaller  than  St.  Peter's  at 
Rome. 

The  spacious  elevation  of  the  vaulted  aisles  gives 
room  for  the  wonderful  choir  and  high  altar.  The 
supporting  pillars,  eighteen  feet  at  the  base,  are  sixty 
in  number,  counting  those  at  the  sides  and  at  the 
ends. 

The  structure  is  built  in  the  Gothic  style.     Part  of 
the  roof  over  the  main  edifice  was  destroyed  by  a  re- 
cent earthquake  while  some  of  the  columns  showed  also 
the  work  of  restoration. 

The  sacristy  contains  many  relics,  including  three 
hundred  robes  made  at  various  times  from  the  sixteenth 
century  to  the  present. 

At  one  side  of  the  Cathedral  are  the  remains  of 
Christopher  Columbus,  brought  from  Havana  after  the 
Spanish  war  with  the  United  States. 

In  one  of  the  private  chapels  that  line  the  walls  is 
Murillo's  marvellous  picture  of  St.  Anthony. 

Several  years  ago  a  man  concealed  himself  in  the 
Cathedral  and,  after  everyone  else  had  left,  proceeded 
to  this  picture  and  standing  on  the  frame  cut  out  the 
figure  of  St.  Anthony  as  far  around  as  he  could 
reach  with  his  knife. 

As  the  picture  was  customarily  covered  by  a  cloth 
the  theft  was  not  discovered  for  three  days,  when  mes- 
sages were  sent  to  all  parts  of  the  world. 

All  trace  was  lost  until  one  day,  six  months  later, 
a  Spanish  gentleman  had  occasion  to  visit  a  small  curio 
shop  in  New  York.  Here  he  was  offered  a  wonderful 
picture  which  he  at  once  recognized  as  the  missing  St. 
Anthony,  still  in  the  form  in  which  it  was  cut  from 
its  frame. 

Hurrying  to  his  lodgings,  ostensibly  to  obtain  the 
two  hundred  and  fifty  dollars  asked,  he  called  in  the 
meantime  at  the  Spanish  embassy  and  reported  his 
discovery. 

Cabling  to  Spain,  word  was  shortly  received  to  bring 
both  man  and  picture  to  Sevilla,  which  was  later  fol- 
lowed  by  the  advice  not  to  mind  about  the  man,  but 
to  return  with  the  picture  at  all  hazards. 

On  its  receipt,  wooden  partitions  were  built  around 
the  chapel  and  after  three  months  the  artists  completed 
their  work  of  restoration,  and  a  great  church  festival 
was  held  to  celebrate  the  event. 

To-day  the  incision  can  only  be  noticed  by  standing 
quite  near  the  picture  in  such  position  that  the  light 
strikes  directly  upon  the  place  where  the  cuts  were 
made. 

The  choir  and  high  altar  have  the  rich  wood  carv- 
ing and  red  marble  common  to  many  of  Spain's  cathe- 
drals. 

There  are  also  several  fine,  stained-glass  windows  of 
the  same  period,  as  the  incomparable  windows  in  the 
Cathedral  at  Toledo. 

After  leaving  the  Cathedral,  we  drove  back  to  the 
hotel  to  test  the  efficiency  of  the  Franco-Spanish  mail 
service  and  were  both  in  a  measure  rewarded. 

Thence  we  went  for  a  general  ride  around  the  city, 
passing,  en  route,  through  the  Paseo  de  Hercules, 
which  has  at  one  end  shafts  of  granite  of  exceptional 
size,  surmounted  by  statues  of  Hercules  and  Julius 
Cassar,  brought  from  the  ruins  of  Italica,  five  miles 
away. 

Continuing  through  the  dirty  streets  of  the  poorer 
quarter  we  presently  emerged  through  one  of  the 
ancient  gateways  to  the  country  without,  and  drove 
along  the  old  Roman-Moorish  walls  which  are  now  only 
standing  in  part. 

Last  evening  we  had  one  of  Benunes'  little  sur- 
prises, but  this  was  quite  beyond  the  ordinary  affair 
and  also  the  most  charming  glimpse  of  a  distinctly 
Spanish  feature  that  we  have  seen.  He  took  us  to 
the  salon  of  Jose  Otero  Aranda,  "  profesor  y  director 
de  baile"  one  time  teacher  of  Otero  and  Carmencita, 
who  won  such  fame,  in  America  and  elsewhere,  for  their 
wonderful  dancing. 

We  entered  first  the  rough  outer  hall,  crowded  with 
the  mothers,  brothers  and  sisters  of  the  performers  in 
the  salon  beyond,  whence  came  the  rhythmic  click  of 
the  castanets. 

Seated  around  one  end  of  the  poor  little  hall  were 
a  dozen  or  so  of  the  prettiest  little  Seiioritas  you  would 
care  to  see — with  their  gay  dresses,  white  mantillas 
and  sparkling  eyes,  forming  a  picture  in  strange  con- 
trast to  the  scene  without. 

To  the  tune  of  a  mandolin  and  guitar,  accompanied 
by  the  "  crack,"  "  crack "  of  the  castanets,  they 
whirled  in  the  odd  gypsy  dances,  sometimes  alone,  of- 
ten by  twos  and  fours  and  once  with  nearly  a  full  qua- 
drille. 

As  they  whirled  here  and  there,  backward  and  for- 
ward, advancing  boldly,  then  evading  with  lithe,  easy 
grace,  skirts  and  mantillas  swishing,  cheeks  afire  and 
eyes  snapping,  timing  perfectly  their  steps  to  the 
"  crack,"  "  crack,"  "  crack,"  it  made  a  scene  wholly 
fascinating  and  unique  to  this  country  of  strange  peo- 
ple and  strange  ways. 

One  little  Senorita,  with  bewitchingly  impudent  up- 
turned nose  and  saucy  eyes,  gave  the  dance  of  the  bull- 
ring,  executing  fantastically  all  the  movements  of  ban- 
derilleros  and  the  matador,  which  won  much  applause 
from  the  four  of  us,  forming  an  appreciative  audience 
at  the  further  end. 

Loli,  the  prettiest  of  them  all,  also  came  in  for  her 
full  share  of  the  bravos. 

Otero  himself,  past  master  in  the  art,  danced  a  few 
figures  with  his  older  pupils  and  we  left  much  pleased 
with  the  charmingly  wholesome  performance  so  differ- 
ent from  the  vulgarity  of  the  Paris  halls. 

If  our  first  visit  to  Spain, — our  first  sight  of  the 
unique  buildings, — had  been  to  the  Moorish  palace  of 
Sevilla,  it  might,  perchance,  have  dimmed  our  en- 
thusiasm, aroused  elsewhere. 

Surfeited  as  we  have  been  with  Spain's  many  monu- 
ments to  the  past,  the  Royal  Alcazares  awakened  an 
almost  brand  new  feeling  of  wonder  and  admiration. 

The  Moorish  structure  was  built  on  the  site  of  the 
old  Roman  Pragtorium,  and  this  gave  way  to  the 
Spanish  building,  although  every  suggestion  of  archi- 
tecture, of  ornamentation,  in  floor,  arch,  ceiling  and 
window,  is  distinctly  Moorish  in  character. 

As  you  approach  past  the  towering  Giralda  and  the 
Cathedral,  you  are  confronted  by  the  brown,  massive 
walls  which  formed  part  of  the  fortifications  that  shel- 
tered the  Moorish  kings. 

Entering  the  frowning  gateway — half  expectant  of 
some  gruff  challenge, — you  find  yourself  at  one  side  of 
the  Court  of  the  Oranges,  where  Peter  the  Cruel  dis- 
pensed such  justice  as  he  was  capable  of. 
Passing  through  another  gateway,  and  diverting 
from  the  many-columned  entrance  where  the  troops 
kept  guard,  and  which  the  succeeding  Spaniards 
blocked  up,  we  traversed  a  narrow  passage  and 
emerged  onto  a  terrace  overlooking  the  most  wonder- 
ful garden  in  the  world. 

Acres  of  waving  green  greet  your  eye.  The  resplen- 
dent southern  foliage  is  set  off  by  intersecting  walls, 
balconies  and  walks,  while  in  the  center  appears  the 
roof  of  a  fairy-like  little  house. 

Right  at  hand  is  the  square  fish  pond,  built  by 
Philip  V.,  in  1733,  with  its  fountains  now  in 
repose. 

Skirting  the  left  of  the  enclosure  is  the  high,  open 
gallery  along  which  Columbus  gained  his  audience  with 
Isobella,  from  the  Tower  of  Gold. 

Below  are  other  terraces  and  in  front  stretch  many 
acres  of  the  tropical  foliage  grown  to  its  present  mag- 
nificence through  the  centuries. 

As  you  turn  and  follow  the  steps  on  the  right  you 
pass  between  two  giant  magnolias,  the  trunk  of  the 
larger  of  which  is  fully  three  feet  through  at  the 
base. 

Diverting  a  moment  from  the  Garden,  we  entered  a 
lower  door  of  the  palace  and  stopped  at  the  end  of  a 
long  bath  under  a  low  ceiling,  where  once  the  Sultanas 
were  said  to  have  splashed  in  their  seclusion. 

At  the  further  end  of  the  bath  was  originally  a 
fountain  and  behind  that  a  cave  where  the  cruel  Peter 
confined  his  wife  on  discovering  her  love  for  his  brother, 
visiting  her  by  a  secret  stairway  from  time  to  time  to 
ascertain  when  she  should  succumb  to  the  tortures  of 
fast. 

Of  his  brother's  fate  we  learned  later,  and  so  I 
shall  tell  you. 

Following  our  guide  we  came  again  into  the  garden. 
The  place  seemed  enchanted. 

Halting  for  a  moment,  Befiunes  called  in  a  loud 
voice :  "  Ahora!  "  and  at  once,  as  if  to  Moses,  tiny- 
streams  of  water  sprang  from  the  pavement  at  our 
feet.  As  he  raised  his  voice  again,  "  Para;  Bast  a," 
they  ceased. 

Once  more  "  Ahora! "  and  they  sprang  into  life 
again. 

As  he  turned  away,  we  lingered  for  a  moment.  The 
magic  streams  stopped,  and  from  behind  an  adjacent 
wall  came  a  rough  old  gardener  who  told  us  that  the 
name  of  those  wonderful  red  plants  was  "  bandaneros." 

In  the  center  of  the  garden  is  a  mosaic-lined  build- 
ing, erected  in  1540,  as  one  of  the  floor  tiles  shows, 
and  used  by  Charles  V.  as  a  smoking-room. 

Everywhere  are  orange  trees,  intermingled  with 
many  other  kinds  of  trees  and  shrubs. 

Flowers  of  every  description  and  of  wonderful  per- 
fume fill  the  gardens,  while  stately  palms  line  the 
walks,  bearing  in  their  tops  huge  clusters  of  the  green 
fruit. 

Returning  towards  the  palace,  we  met  a  courteous 
old  gentleman,  the  Marques  de  Irun,  whose  care  these 
gardens  have  been  for  the  last  thirty  years,  and  which 
certainly  give  evidence  of  his  painstaking,  intelligent 
attention. 

We  expressed  to  him  our  pleasure  in  the  unique  sight 
and  he  invited  our  inspection  of  the  forbidden  upper 
stories  of  the  palace. 

At  the  door  a  little  girl  met  us  with  a  rosebud 
apiece  and  we  rested  a  moment  while  she  and  her  sisters 
whirled  in  their  gyspy  dance,  timed  by  the  ringing 
castanets. 

These  old  buildings  are  like  the  rough  native  fruit, 
— coarse  and  uninviting  outside,  but  beautiful  within. 

It  is  always  a  marvel  how  the  rough  skin  of  the 
pomegranate  can  contain  such  delicious  kernels  and 
how  these  bare  old  walls  can  hide  such  exquisite  beau- 
ties. 

Entering  the  main  part  of  the  palace, — trying  not 
to  linger  before  the  tapestry  lining  the  royal  entrance, 
— we  followed  the  passage  to  the  left,  then  to  the  right 
and  came  to  a  door  looking  upon  the  Patio  de  las 
Doncellas,  the  very  core  of  that  marvellous  building. 

Such  a  riot  of  mosaic,  such  beauty  in  columned 
walk,  in  wonderfully  carved  arches,  in  latticed  windows 
and  marble  flooring,  you  never  saw. 

The  sight  dazes  one. 

Unlearned  in  architecture  as  I  am,  it  was  neverthe- 
less a  delight  to  observe  the  perfect  perspective  which 
each  succeeding  arch  gave  to  the  view,  appearing 
again  and  yet  again  through  those  nearest  at  hand. 

As  you  paused  you  could  almost  fancy  you  heard 
the  slippered  tread  of  the  Sultanas  sauntering  grace- 
fully along  in  their  clinging  robes  and  shielding  man- 
tillas. 

But  you  do  not  need  fancy  to  picture  the  beauties 
here.  They  are  evident  in  every  aspect  of  the  court 
and  the  adjacent  rooms  and  halls. 

Each  room  is  a  marvel  in  itself  and  assuredly  shows 
to  fullest  advantage  the  Moorish  fancy  in  building  and 
ornamentation. 

We  walked  slowly  through  the  various  corridors, 
leading  on  and  on,  loath  to  leave  one  for  the  equal 
attractiveness  of  the  next. 

For  a  moment  we  paused  in  the  Hall  of  the  Ambas- 
sadors with  its  main  entrance  from  the  patio  and  with 
its  three  perfect  arched  doorways  leading  to  rooms 
beyond. 

Description  is  beggared  by  the  picture  from  one 
corner  of  the  hall  through  the  horseshoe  arch,  fringed 
with  the  most  delicate  carving,  to  the  graceful  columns 
and  clean  white  marble  of  the  patio  with  its  back- 
ground of  mosaic  and  carving  in  barbaric  pro- 
fusion. 

We  crossed  the  little  Court  of  the  Dolls — "  Patio  de 
las  Munecas  " — where  Peter  slew  his  brother.  This 
room  derives  its  name  from  the  many  little  dolls'  heads 
appearing  in  the  frescoing  around  the  arches. 

Climbing  the  stairs,  we  came  to  the  rooms  forbidden 
to  the  gaze  of  the  usual  traveller. 

On  the  left  as  you  enter  is  a  little  chapel  built  by 
the  first  Isobella. 

In  the  rooms  immediately  beyond  are  tapestries  af- 
ter Gobelin,  Rubens  and  the  Flemish  artist,  Tenier, 
while  in  another  room  are  seven  exquisite  tapestries 
illustrating  scenes  in  the  life  of  the  Crazy  Knight  and 
his  faithful  Sancho  Panza. 

Beyond  are  the  living-rooms  of  the  royal  family, 
used  not  so  very  long  ago,  and  now  being  renovated 
for  other  noble  visitors. 

We  were  drawn  to  the  windows  by  the  enchanting 
view  of  the  gardens  from  an  upper  level,  stretching 
away  below  in  their  wonderful  beauty.  One  can  hardly 
imagine  a  more  charming  residence  for  idle  royalty — 
especially  in  this  country  of  barrenness. 

In  the  afternoon,  Mr.  T and  I  climbed  the  wind- 
ing inclines  of  the  Giralda,  and  were  rewarded  by 
the  view  made  more  clear  than  before  by  a  perfect 
day. 

Again  as  we  lingered  on  the  upper  balcony,  the  bells 
began  to  sound  below  us  and,  although  the  din  was 
tremendous,  we  hurried  down  to  watch  the  blind  ringer 
and  his  agile  assistants. 

Even  at  that  height,  and  in  apparent  danger  of 
being  carried  over  the  wall,  they  would  let  the  revolv- 
ing bells  lift  them  above  the  parapet,  whence,  balancing 
themselves  on  steps  inside  the  wall,  they  would  throw 
their  weight  inward  and  fall  prone,  judging  time  and 
distance  to  a  nicety  so  that  the  upward  swing  would, 
by  a  bare  six  inches,  save  them  from  crashing  on  the 
tiles. 

Returning  to  the  Hotel  de  Madrid,  the  zealous  cou- 
rier obtained  another  fancy  rig  and  we  rode  around  the 
fashionable  drives  which,  as  in  Madrid,  draw  the  in- 
dolent wealthy  on  pleasant  afternoons. 

There  are  not  so  many  so-called  sights  in  Sevilla 
as  in  Madrid,  but  we  find  our  surroundings,  the  climate, 
the  people,  the  general  atmosphere,  infinitely  more 
pleasing  than  at  the  capital. 

Chaptere IX. CADIZ 

I  HAVE  likened  the  old  buildings  of  Spain  to  the 
native  fruit  of  the  country ;  rough  on  the  ex- 
terior, attractive  within.  The  comparison,  in- 
versely, might  be  made  of  Spain  itself. 

On  its  borders, — its  coast  line  and  the  Pyrenees, — 
lies  the  country's  only  natural  attractiveness. 

One  might  go  almost  the  entire  circuit — from  San 
Sebastien,  Bilbao,  around  to  Cadiz  and  up  the  Mediter- 
ranean towns — and  a  beautiful  country  would  be  seen. 

The  interior,  Spain  bisected,  presents  nothing  but 
an  uninteresting  land,  for  the  most  part  barren  and 
dried  up. 

But  when  you  begin  to  approach  the  sea  again, 
vegetation  becomes  more  luxuriant,  the  people 
brighter,  more  attractive  and  thrifty. 

Whether  it  is  from  the  invigoration  of  the  sea  or 
from  the  awakening  contact  with  other  peoples,  it  is 
hard  to  say ;  but  the  fact  remains  that  this  portion  of 
Spain  seems  the  only  part  truly  alive. 

All  the  way  to  Cadiz  this  morning  the  landscape  be- 
came brighter  and  the  country  more  attractive  and 
beautiful.  For  fifty  or  sixty  miles  the  road  runs 
through  almost  continuous  fields  of  wheat  and  barley. 

The  land  seems  to  undergo  constant  cultivation. 
With  the  peasants  everywhere  on  the  landscape,  plow- 
ing the  land  with  their  ox-teams,  preparing  the  fields 
for  the  winter  crops,  the  country  presented  a  most 
thrifty  appearance. 

Frequently  the  train  ran  by  veritable  forests  of  olive 
trees,  while  orange  groves  were  equally  abundant.  The 
contrast  with  the  North  Country,  cis-Pyrenees,  is 
vivid. 

Soon  the  country-side  became  dotted  with  herds  of 
cattle  and  more  particularly  of  the  fighting  bulls,  a 
type  peculiar  to  Andalusia,  bred  for  all  Spanish  ter- 
ritory. For  it  is  here  that  there  are  raised  the  hero- 
victims  of  the  hundreds  of  rings  throughout  the  coun- 
try. 

The  best  go,  of  course,  to  the  rings  of  near-by 
Sevilla,  to  Madrid,  to  Saragossa  and  to  the  immense 
Plaza  del  Toros  at  Barcelona,  but  every  town  or  city 
of  any  pretensions  whatsoever  has  its  ring,  even  if  its 
ordinary  victims  are  driven  from  the  neighboring  farms 
and  the  Andalusian  bull  is  an  occasion. 

Herds  upon  herds  of  these  splendid  animals  enlivened 
the  landscape  on  all  sides  and  evidenced  the  extent  of 
this  industry. 

It  is  said  that,  during  their  raising,  the  bulls  never 
see  the -color  of  red  until  they  are  actually  in  the  ring, 
when  it  is  flaunted  in  their  faces  for  the  first  time  to 
enrage  and  bewilder  them.  Traditionally  the  incite- 
ment to  fury  in  every  land,  when,  for  the  first  time, 
the  color  is  thrown  in  their  very  eyes  they  become  for 
the  moment  dazed,  so  that  the  trained  fighter  has  the 
instant  for  his  thrilling  escape. 

By  the  way,  there  are  regular  schools  for  bull-fight- 
ers all  over  this  country.     Their  apprenticeship  begins 
in  the  slaughter  houses,  after  which,  while  still  young, 
they  are  trained  to  judgment,  quickness,  nerve  and 
agility  by  slow  gradations.  The  fighters'  early  prac- 
tice is  in  rings  with  cows  or  small  bulls  as  the  ob- 
jects for  their  attacks,  until  they  are  qualified  to  step 
into  the  subordinate  positions  in  the  prominent  rings, 
which  lead  to  the  coveted  work  as  matadors. 

But  on  to  Cadiz! 

Hedges  of  cactus  and  century  plants  line  both  sides 
of  the  railroad  which  winds  through  a  rolling,  fertile 
country.  Numerous  flocks  of  turkeys  are  seen,  often 
in  hundreds,  tended  by  children. 

The  last  hour  and  a  half  of  the  trip  is  through  a 
vineyard  country,  whose  terraces  of  vines  seem  endless 
and  ample  enough  to  supply  the  whole  country  with 
the  common  red  wine. 

When  still  twenty-five  miles  from  Cadiz,  a  view  of 
the  city  is  obtained  across  the  intervening  bay;  a  veri- 
table city  of  white,  set  in  the  amethyst  sea  that  well- 
nigh  surrounds  it. 

The  route  leads  by  a  little  town  where  lived  quietly 
Cervera  of  Santiago.  Rarely  in  the  last  few  years 
was  this  gentleman  seen,  keeping  for  the  most  part  to 
the  retirement  of  his  estates  and  appearing  only  at 
long  intervals  in  the  gay  circles  of  Cadiz. 

This  city, — as  you  know, — is  set  at  the  end  of  a 
long,  narrow  peninsula  leading  boldly  to  sea,  while 
with  its  mainland  it  actually  forms  the  Isla  de  Leon, 
named  after  that  searcher  for  the  fountain  of  eternal 
youth  who  found  instead  the  beauties  of  our  own 
Florida. 

As  you  approach  the  town  across  the  marshes,  an 
odd  sight  is  presented  by  the  pyramids  of  salt  show- 
ing in  all  directions.  Looking  in  one  way  alone  over 
one  hundred  of  these  regular  piles  were  counted. 

The  little  sand  strip  running  seaward  from  the  Isla 
de  Leon  is  flat,  straight  and  narrow,  dotted  at  half 
its  legth  by  a  fort. 

Crowded  on  the  end  lies  "  Spotless  Town  "  with  its 
fine,  tall  buildings,  and  clean,  though  narrow,  streets. 

In  Cadiz  with  its  sixty-four  thousand  inhabitants 
are  many  clubs  and  other  indications  that  this  is  a 
city  for  residence  only. 

Little  business  is  apparent.  The  people  are  wealthy 
and  indolent. 

Again  the  commercial  instinct  of  our  philosophic 
guide  asserts  itself.  Leading  the  way  to  an  extensive 
warehouse,  he  pointed  with  pride  to  rows  of  the  huge 
tuns  of  wine,  ranged  side  by  side,  perhaps  a  hundred 
or  more.  "  The  largest  wine-cellar  in  the  whole 
world,"  quoth  he ;  "  the  wine  itself, — delicious.  Try 
it.  See  for  yourself.  And  if  you  want  to  take  away 
any, — the  owner,  he  is  an  old  friend  of  mine.  Perhaps. 
You  don't  want  any?  Nothing  like  this  in  all  Spain. 
No?" 

And  yet,  after  all,  he  is  so  zealous,  so  knowing  and 
so  efficient  that  maybe  his  eagerness  was  disinterested. 
Quien  Sdbe? 

The  main  point  of  interest  in  Cadiz,  is — Cadiz. 
Beyond  this  the  Cathedral,  comparatively  modern,  al- 
though one  hundred  and  twenty-seven  years  occupied 
its  erection,  is  most  attractive,  with  its  interior  entirely 
finished  in  marble. 

One  of  the  most  beautiful  features  of  the  city  is  the 
public  park  filled  with  a  rare  collection  of  trees,  flowers 
and  shrubs. 

In  another  smaller  promenade,  a  drago  tree  is 
pointed  out  as  five  hundred  years  old. 

In  the  chapel  of  an  old  nunnery, — part  of  which, 
with  the  incongruous  taste  of  these  people,  is  used  as 
a  prison, — is  shown  the  picture  on  which  Murillo  spent 
his  last  efforts.  In  stepping  backward  on  the  scaffold- 
ing, to  view  the  effect  of  his  work,  he  fell,  receiving 
fatal  injuries. 

The  reviving  taste  of  the  salt  spray  after  the  many 
days  in  the  arid  country,  the  quaint  old  city  with  its 
cleanliness  and  peculiarity  of  appearance  and  setting, 
the  glimpse  of  a  better  and  less  indolent  peasantry,  all 
made  the  tiresome  trip  from  Sevilla  well  worth  while. 

Back  to  the  Hotel  de  Madrid  to-night,  whence  the 
road  of  our  travels  leads  to  Malaga. 

Chapter X. MALAGA 

WE  have  thought  it  well  from  time  to  time 
to  curb  "El  Sabio's"  inordinate  ad- 
miration for  his  country.  When  he  has 
gone  into  raptures  over  some  truly  won- 
derful bit  of  architecture,  or  grandiloquently  extolled 
the  marvels  of  some  royal  residence,  we  have  quoted 
examples  elsewhere.  One  day  in  Toledo  he  remarked 
with  uncommon  emphasis  upon  the  munificence  of  the 
builders  of  the  Hotel  Castilla. 

"  Two  millions  of  pesetas,"  quoth  he. 

"Humph,"  says  Mr.  T •.  "What  do  you  sup- 
pose Americans  are  expending  on  one  railway 
station  ?  " 

"  One  cannot  tell,"  replies  the  Senor  cautiously. 
"  They  say  in  America  money  flows  like  water.  Per- 
haps  five   millions    of   pesetas.      Yes  ?  " 

"  One  hundred  million  dollars, — five  hundred  million 
pesetas,"  announces  Mr.  T remorselessly. 

The  Senor  grasps  his  brow. 

His  glance  was  discreetly  polite,  but  voluble.  He 
did  not  at  once  recover,  but  later,  when  perchance  we 
spoke  disparagingly  of  the  barren  prospect  of  inland 
Spain  and  he  reiterated  his  promises  to  show  us  a  "  mil- 
lion olive  trees  in  one  grove,"  we  regretted  his  fall. 
However,  after  the  trip  to  Malaga  it  is  becoming  that 
we  should  bear  evidence  that  the  Senor  was  not  so  far 
out  in  his  estimate  after  all. 

The  fertile  plains  stretching  to  the  Sierra  de  Ronda 
contained  many  a  forest  of  countless  numbers,  whose 
bright  green  foliage  afforded  a  welcome  relief  from  the 
barren  lands  of  the  north.  Here  also  were  herds  upon 
herds  of  cattle,  sheep  and  hogs,  while  a  thrifty  peas- 
antry worked  ceaselessly  in  the  fields.  The  sight  of 
forty-one  teams  of  oxen  plowing  side  by  side  suggested 
the  breadth  and  activity  of  our  own  western  farms. 

Much  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  inner  man,  after  sev- 
eral hours'  run  from  Sevilla,  the  train  stopped  at  Bo- 
badilla,  which  is  a  junction  of  four  or  five  roads. 
Situated  off  here  in  the  plains,  it  has  a  surprisingly 
modern  appearance  with  its  underground  passages  to 
the  tracks  and  its  exceptional  restaurant. 

Ere  the  train  pulled  out,  the  courier  had  the  bag- 
gage transferred  to  a  front  compartment  to  which  we 
repaired,  and  seated  ourselves  in  the  bow  windows  af- 
fording observation  ahead.  "  El  Sabio's  "  manner, — 
by  now  well  learned, — prepared  one  for  something 
"  grand,  beautiful,  magnificent,"  and  we  began  to  look 
up  adjectives  in  the  "  Ingles-Espafiol "  to  appease 
him. 

Shortly  we  approached  the  foothills  of  the  moun- 
tains, and  the  slow,  puffing  engine  took  us  to  higher 
grades  and  wilder  scenery.  The  fertile  fields  were  left 
behind;  the  outlook  was  barren,  rough  and  rocky. 

Anon  we  plunged  noisily  into  a  tunnel  and  shortly 
emerged  into  the  sunlight  beyond.  Again  we  were  in 
darkness  with  the  roaring  of  the  train  making  conver- 
sation impossible,  but  whenever  we  emerged  the  pano- 
rama had  become  more  wild  and  more  beautiful  until 
finally,  as  if  through  a  curtain,  we  burst  sud- 
denly upon  the  full  magnificence  of  a  tropical 
land. 

Directly  beneath  us,  the  gorge  plunged  precipitously 
to  the  rushing  Guadalahorce,  a  silver  thread  at  that 
great  depth;  above  rose  snow-capped  peaks,  grand  in 
their  impressive  majesty.  Ahead  stretched  the  fair 
valley  blossoming  to  the  waters  of  the  mountains  and 
to  the  kindly  sun  of  the  south. 

Such  an  instant  comparison  between  totally  differ- 
ing lands  and  climates  is  hardly  to  be  found  elsewhere 
and  is  not  to  be  described  by  word  of  tongue  or  pen. 
Until  engineering  skill  and  daring  pierced  the  crags 
with  eighteen  tunnels  and  made  a  way  for  the  road  of 
iron,  the  gorge  itself  was  impassable. 

As  the  train  approaches  Malaga,  through  the  smil- 
ing valley,  the  scene  is  most  pleasing.  One  asks  one- 
self if  this  can  really  be  a  part  of  the  Spain  left  so 
shortly  behind,  but  as  the  town  is  reached,  with  its  old, 
unattractive  buildings  and  the  dirty,  unkempt  appear- 
ance of  the  poorer  quarters  and  the  poorer  people, 
prominently  in  evidence,  one  concludes  after  all  that 
the  same  race  has  abode  here. 

Yet  Malaga  affords  much  of  interest  and  attract- 
iveness. There  is  a  thrift  in  the  very  atmosphere  that 
the  dried  core  of  the  country  knows  not.  The  salty 
invigoration  of  the  south  winds  has  quickened  a  bit 
the  sleeping  people ;  the  transforming  touch  of  the  sea 
bringing  its  contact  with  other  lands  has  awakened 
them  with  the  magic  wand  of  trade.  They  are  indus- 
trious in  the  fields,  the  orchards   and  the  vineyards ; 
they  braid  in  the  homes,  and  labor  on  the  docks  and  on 
the  sea.  The  reputation  of  their  industries  has 
gone  around  the  world,  not  so  much,  perhaps,  by 
reason  of  their  thrift,  as  for  the  natural  advan- 
tages of  their  land  which  they  could  hardly  refuse  to 
develop. 

The  town  itself  is  not  well  situated;  it  is  low,  less 
clean  and  more  poorly  built  than  even  many  another 
Spanish  city.  But  here,  following  the  exception  of  the 
other  towns  of  the  coast,  there  is  real  activity,  some- 
thing beyond  the  mere  exertion  of  existence. 

One  industry — of  peculiar  interest  to  Mr.  T ,  is 

the  manufacture  of  hats  from  straw,  the  Malaga  hats 
famous  for  their  cheapness  and  known  all  over  the 
world,  and  particularly  to  every  worker  in  the  fields  of 
our  country  at  least. 

This  is  distinctly  a  home  industry.  The  straw  is 
grown  and  garnered  in  the  near-by  fields,  and  after 
proper  curing  is  taken  into  the  dwellings  to  be  braided 
into  hats.  Here,  again,  the  effort  of  the  weaker  sex 
is  paramount.  It  is  a  common  occurrence,  looking 
through  the  open  doorways,  to  perceive  women  and 
girls  industriously  braiding  the  never-ending  piles  of 
head  wear.  Fourteen  cents  a  dozen  they  receive  for 
the  finished  article  and  a  good  day's  work  is  six  hats 
ready  for  the  collector.  That  is, — seven  cents  for  a 
day's  labor. 

To  one  woman,  obligingly  answering  the  many  ques- 
tions, Mr.  T gave  a  bit  of  silver  to  recompense 

her  for  the  distraction  from  her  work.  Her  surprise 
and    delight    in    perceiving    the    unusual    amount, — 
maybe  five  pesetas, — were  pathetic  and  afforded  much 
reflection. 

Regularly  the  collector  makes  his  rounds  and  de- 
livers his  piles  of  merchandise  to  the  exporter  who 
sends  them,  for  the  most  part,  to  America.  Three 
hundred  thousand  dozen  a  year  this  little  town  and 
its  suburbs  supply  for  home  and  abroad. 

Over  in  America  the  hats  are  taken  from  the  bales, 
sorted  and  cased  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the 
trade.  After  the  several  commissions  are  paid  and 
the  freight  and  duty  settled,  Malaga  hats  are  sold  in 
American  markets  for  from  fifty  cents  to  one  dollar 
a  dozen,  and  even  the  lowest  price  represents  quite  an 
advance  over  the  fourteen  cents  obtained  by  the  hum- 
ble manufacturers. 

One  so  quickly  becomes  accustomed  to  many  things, 
and  a  Sunday  in  Malaga  found  our  party  following 
the  gay  throng  to  the  Plaza  de  Toros.  This  particu- 
lar day's  affair,  outside  of  the  butchery,  was  a  bur- 
lesque performance,  although  probably  not  so  in- 
tended. As  the  bulls  were  little  fellows, — two-year- 
olds,  they  seemed, — the  management  featured  for  the 
stellar  attraction  a  rotund  darky  of  the  true  clown 
type,  whose  proper  desire  to  keep  his  skin  whole,  shown 
by  his  rolling  eyes  when  the  sharp  horns  came  too 
near,  was  extremely  droll. 

Malaga  presents  the  extremes  of  life.  The  ordinary 
sections  of  the  town  are  quite  as  slovenly  and  as  un- 
attractive as  anything  we  have  seen.  In  the  better 
quarter,  however,  there  is  one  of  the  finest  avenues  to 
be  found  in  the  whole  of  Spain.     With  its  breadth  of 
a  full  hundred  feet,  its  promenade  through  tropical 
foliage  guarded  by  lines  of  royal  palms  and  flanked 
by  beautiful  residences,  one  seeks  in  vain  to  recall  its 
peer. 

That  the  trades  of  Malaga  have  flourished  and  its 
merchants  have  prospered  is  evidenced  by  the  palatial 
dwellings  so  frequently  seen  in  the  town  and  its  en- 
virons. In  the  Calle  de  la  Victoria,  for  all  the  gener- 
ous frontage  and  imposing  grounds  surrounding  the 
modern  mansions,  land  is  exorbitantly  high. 

Back  in  the  suburbs  we  found  one  of  the  most  at- 
tractive villas  imaginable.  The  house  was  of  stone, 
low  and  rambling,  with  a  wonderful  pergola.  Nature 
contributed  largely  to  the  fascinating  possibilities  of 
the  grounds.  A  stream  from  the  near-by  mountains, 
first  seen  in  a  marvellous  waterfall,  furnished  a  never- 
ending  supply  for  artistic  little  lakes  and  fanciful  foun- 
tains, while  indigenous  plants  and  shrubs  af- 
forded unlimited  opportunity  for  the  landscape  gar- 
dener. 

Malaga  has  many  fine  clubs  and  cafes,  and  so  num- 
erous are  its  outdoor  loiterers  that  in  the  fashionable 
promenade,  regular  attendants  scurry  about  to  col- 
lect charges  for  the  seats. 

A  picturesque  touch  is  given  to  the  inner  harbor  by 
the  fishers'  dwellings  just  beyond  the  docks  where  are 
moored  the  stately  merchantmen  and  the  heavy  freight- 
ers, while  still  further  along  the  shore  winds  a  beau- 
tiful drive  near  the  lapping  waters  of  the  blue  Mediter- 
ranean. 

Chapter XI. Granada-
THE  way  to  Granada  leads  back  along  the 
gorge  of  the  Hoyo  de  Chorro  and  the  valley 
of  the  Guadalahorce  to  the  junction  of  Boba- 
dilla,  when,  swinging  northward  and  to  the 
east,  the  road  crosses  the  fertile  fields  of  the  flatlands 
thickly  grown  with  olive  trees  planted  in  precise  regu- 
larity, which  presently  give  way  to  orange  groves  and 
plantations  of  the  sugar  beet.  Train  upon  train  were 
seen  loaded  with  this  vegetable,  en  route  to  the  Gra- 
nada factories,  while  at  the  stations  were  immense 
loads  of  oranges  packing  for  the  market. 

One  approaches  Granada  with  the  full  solemnity  of 
history  pressing  upon  him.  Everything  here  suggests 
the  Moors,  and  as  you  come  to  this  land  of  their  great- 
est power  in  Spain,  a  rapid  survey  of  their  coming, 
accession  and  fall  sweeps  before  your  mind. 

As  their  full  tide  began  its  ebb,  the  Moslem  hosts 
yielded  reluctantly  the  northern  country  to  the  con- 
quering Spaniards  and  entrenched  their  diminished 
forces  in  the  fair  fields  under  the  shadow  of  the  Alham- 
bra,  within  whose  well-nigh  impregnable  ramparts 
they  expended  their  last  vain  efforts  to  preserve  a  foot- 
hold in  a  land  that  had  ceased  to  be  foreign  soil.  With 
their  weakening  rule,  Toledo,  Cordoba,  Sevilla,  Mal- 
aga had,  in  turn,  passed  from  their  control  to  Spanish 
sovereignty,  although  centuries  elapsed  in  their  con- 
quest. 

The  greatest  of  Moorish  power,  wealth,  enlighten- 
ment and  profligacy  had  centered  under  the  pinnacle 
of  the  Alhambra  and  the  town  and  plain  below  held 
their  last  camps.  In  their  disseminating  empire,  Gra- 
nada remained  the  last  rock  upon  which,  for  a  space, 
stranded  the  parting  hope  of  the  Moors.  With  their 
own  craftiness  turned  against  themselves,  with  their 
treachery  to  each  other,  gathering  its  fruit  upon  their 
falling  courts,  with  the  freedom  of  their  practices 
finally  encompassing  the  ruin  of  the  last  house  of  their 
rulers,  nevertheless  their  ultimate  abandonment  of  the 
fair  land  they  were  so  loath  to  leave,  has  its  pathetic 
appeal. 

Like  many  another  story  of  a  vanishing  race,  the 
last  chapter  in  the  Moslem  rule  in  Spain  witnessed  the 
fruition  of  a  nation's  weakness. 

With  a  breaking  empire  plain  before  him,  Abu'l 
Hassan  turned  his  thoughts  from  his  nation's  dire  need 
to  his  own  pleasures  and  abandoned  his  good  wife 
Aisha  for  the  charms  of  a  beautiful  Spanish  slave,  Xo- 
rayah,  "  The  Morning  Star."  A  prey  to  his  passions, 
the  house  of  Abu'l  Hassan  divided  against  him,  and  his 
own  son,  revolting  against  his  father,  became  the  last 
of  the  Moors  to  wield  the  sceptre,  where  for  centuries 
his  people  had  ruled  and  prospered. 

Boabdil  himself,  weak  and  vacillating,  crafty  in  that 
he  betrayed  the  neighboring  cities  of  his  faith  to  the 
encroaching  Spaniards,  saw  too  late  that  he  had  only 
surrendered  the  outposts  of  his  final  citadel  to  a  foe 
that  would  not  be  denied.  Marshalling  the  remnants 
of  his  mighty  hosts  he  made  a  last  stand  in  the  Al- 
hambra,  but  surrounded  by  an  overwhelming  force,  re- 
lentless and  now  sure  of  their  purpose,  he  yielded  an 
almost  impregnable  fortress  with  but  a  show  of  re- 
sistance, making  sure  only  that  he  might  accomplish 
his  own  escape. 

It  is  said  that  as  Boabdil  fled  with  his  mother  and 
others  who  had  remained  faithful,  he  halted  on  the 
heights  of  the  Sierras  for  a  look  at  the  last  strong- 
hold of  the  mighty  empire  he  was  forever  abandoning. 
Overcome  with  emotion  he  gazed  at  the  fair  valley 
and  the  noble  ramparts,  so  long  the  home  of  his  peo- 
ple, but  Aisha  sternly  bade  him  "  weep  not  like  a 
woman  for  what  he  could  not  defend  like  a  man." 

As  the  train  winds  through  the  foothills,  the  lofty 
peaks  of  the  Sierra  Nevadas  loom  up  in  front,  the  high- 
est rising  eleven  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
sea.  Presently  the  wondrous  valley  of  the  Vega  is  laid 
before  you  like  a  map,  the  most  fruitful  land  in  all 
Spain.  The  road  follows  for  a  while  the  barren  side 
of  the  plain  and  gives  a  view  of  the  flatland  nearly  a 
score  of  miles  long  and  almost  as  wide,  banked  at  one 
side  by  the  foothills  of  the  Sierras  and  cut  in  the 
center  by  the  dried  bed  of  the  Vega. 

This  plain  is  a  veritable  garden  of  the  south,  plenti- 
fully watered  by  the  diverted  channels  of  the  river  and 
dotted  here  and  there  over  its  entire  area  by  the 
white-walled  hamlets  of  half  a  hundred  villages.  On 
the  slopes  opposite  rises  the  city  of  Granada,  above 
which  the  massive  ramparts  and  heavy  towers  of  the 
Alhambra  brood  like  a  sentinel  on  watch.  As  the  road 
traverses  the  valley — which  to  the  eye  seems  perfectly 
flat — an  intimate  view  of  the  fields  is  given,  dis- 
closing a  most  luxuriant  growth  of  vegetation  and 
tropical  fruits. 

From  the  station,  a  two-mile  drive  up  the  hill  takes 
one  to  the  Hotel  Washington  Irving,  close  upon  the 
grounds  of  the  Alhambra.  This  hotel  is  a  long,  ram- 
bling structure,  three  stories  high,  owing  its  name,  if 
not  its  being,  to  the  author  who  dwelt  in  Granada  in 
1828  and  the  few  succeeding  years.  To  prove  it  all, 
a  large  picture  of  Irving  hangs  in  the  office;  tales 
galore  have  been  handed  down  and  are  recounted  of 
the  writer  and  the  love  which  the  people  of  Spain  and 

particularly  of  Granada  bore  him.    Indeed,  Mr.  T 

was  assigned  "  the  very  rooms  where  he  lived  and 
wrote,"  for  a  few  weeks  before  an  appreciative  govern- 
ment renovated  a  suite  for  him  within  the  walls  of  the 
Alhambra. 

During  the  recent  unpleasantness,  anything  Amer- 
ican or  suggestive  thereof  achieved  unpopularity  so 
great  that  even  the  name  of  the  hotel  was  changed, 
signs  were  torn  down,  and  beloved  as  was  the  name  of 
Irving  it  was  for  the  time  forgotten.  When  the  clouds 
of  war  had  cleared  away,  however,  the  past  came  to 
its  own  again  and  once  more  flourished  the  kindly 
hostelry  with  its  name  as  of  yore  and  with  its  appeal 
to  the  strangers  from  across  the  sea. 

Be  that  as  it  may,  Mr.  T describes  his  rooms 

as  the  best  since  leaving  New  York,  with  their  cheer- 
ful  outlook,  companionable  fireplaces  and  rich  furnish- 
ings in  blue. 

As  a  whole,  Granada  presents  a  rather  complex  ap- 
pearance to-day.  Its  older  part,  like  Toledo,  is  emi- 
nently a  city  of  the  past.  There  its  great  wealth, 
power  and  beauty  have  faded  for  all  time ;  it  has  filled 
its  page  in  the  world's  history  and  is  hardly  to  be  re- 
juvenated. 

The  crumbling  walls  may  be  rebuilt,  but  they  will 
not  again  hold  the  wealth  of  a  mighty  race;  the  ram- 
parts of  the  Alhambra  are  not  likely  to  shield  again  the 
court  of  a  powerful  empire. 

In  the  new  section  towards  the  valley, — Granada 
proper, — one  finds  a  modern  city  with  every  appear- 
ance of  thrift  and  prosperity.  The  wonderful  re- 
sources of  the  country  have  brought  wealth  to  the 
people,  their  trade  has  expanded  and  with  its  grow- 
ing needs  a  new  city  is  rising  almost  from  the  very 
ashes  of  the  old.  Modern,  steel-framed  structures  are 
building  on  every  hand;  up-to-date  customs  and  con- 
veniences are  everywhere  apparent,  so  that  a  bit  of  the 
new  world  is  coming  to  this  fertile  valley  of  the  an- 
cient Moors. 

The  location  of  Granada  is  of  exceptional  advantage 
and  beauty.  Nowhere  else,  inland,  in  the  whole  Iber- 
ian Peninsula  is  the  outlook  so  pleasing.  From  the 
heights  of  the  Alhambra  gazing  towards  the  Sierras 
one  sees  winter  and  summer  in  close  proximity ;  a 
mere  five-mile  stretch  of  land  separates  the  snowy 
peaks  from  fields  as  blossoming  as  our  country  in  June. 
The  view  down  the  valley  is  one  beyond  compare,  with 
the  verdant  vegetation  and  the  snug  little  towns  set 
in  the  fields  of  green. 

In  the  city  itself  there  is  a  most  confused  conglom- 
eration of  dwellings  from  the  caves  of  the  gypsies  to 
the  modern  houses  of  the  merchants.  Not  long  since 
a  Spanish  tradesman,  prospering  from  the  sale  of  his 
wares,  purchased  an  old  Moorish  palace,  located  in 
the  heart  of  the  business  quarter.  Curious  to  establish 
the  limits  of  his  venture,  he  caused  the  rubbish  to  be 
excavated  and  the  plaster  to  be  taken  away.  Much  to 
his  surprise  and  delight  his  efforts  were  rewarded  by 
the  discovery  of  a  marvellous  little  chapel,  with  its 
wonderful  mosaics  and  carvings  still  intact,  which 
now  serves  as  an  excellent  office  and  showroom.  Surely 
his  competitors  have  nothing  so  wonderful  in  which 
to  display  their  goods  and  the  curious  bring  to  him 
as  well  many  pesetas  for  a  mere  look  at  the  place. 

A  branch  of  the  Genii  runs  for  a  distance  beneath 
the  busiest  of  the  city's  streets,  and  close  to  where  it 
emerges  begins  a  broad  promenade  set  off  by  fine 
palms  and  other  tropical  foliage.  Beyond  this  is  a 
beautiful  bronze  of  Columbus  supplicating  Isobella 
for  means  to  pursue  his  discoveries. 

The  Cathedral,  a  striking  memorial  to  the  Chris- 
tian accession  of  Southern  Spain,  affords,  perhaps, 
the  best  example  of  faultless  architecture  to  be  found 
in  this  country  if  not  in  Europe.  The  interior,  with 
its  length  of  three  hundred  and  eighty  feet,  breadth 
of  two  hundred  and  twenty,  and  height  of  one  hun- 
dred, is  grand  and  imposing.  Massive  columns  sup- 
port the  loftly,  vaulted  ceiling,  while  no  two  of  the  in- 
tervening  arches  are  alike.  Here  are  the  tombs  of 
Ferdinand  and  Isobella,  bearing  beautiful  marble 
monuments.  Below  is  the  vault  containing  their  re- 
mains. 

Leaving  the  Cathedral  a  short  walk  takes  one 
through  the  old  Moorish  bazaar  with  its  quaint  shops 
and  houses,  which  constitutes  the  present  day  shop- 
ping district.  The  tradespeople  are  as  active  as  bees 
in  a  clover  field. 

A  little  uncommon  excursion  after  lunch  afforded 
a  most  amusing  character  study  and,  perhaps,  an  ex- 
ample of  the  guile  of  our  careless  travellers. 

A  short  distance  from  the  Alhambra,  on  a  mountain 
6ide  looking  towards  the  beautiful  plain,  is  located  a 
wonderful  estate  whose  Castle,  situated  near  the  top, 
enraptures  one  with  the  view,  from  one  side  over  the 
intervening  terraces  to  the  Valley  of  the  Vega,  and 
from  the  other  to  the  majestic  summits  of  the  Sierras. 

Its  origin  or  history  matter  not — imagination  can 
picture  as  fair  and  perhaps  as  true  a  tale  as  could  be 
discovered  here — but  the  present  incumbent  is  a  court- 
eous gentleman  of  French  extraction  whose  many 
mines  in  the  near-by  ranges  make  a  residence  close  at 
hand  desirable,  while  at  leisure  moments  between  the 
exigencies  of  his  business  duties  he  finds  opportunity 
to  further  beautify  his  wonderful  estate  and  in  this 
bit  of  Eden  to  devote  his  efforts  to  a  hobby  for  col- 
lecting rare  and  beautiful  works  of  art. 

This  gentleman  was  most  hospitable,  inviting  an  in- 
spection of  his  premises  and  supplementing  his  wel- 
come with  a  generous  offering  of  rare  old  wine. 

The  grounds  are  as  beautiful  as  an  excellent  taste 
and  unlimited  natural  opportunity  can  make  them. 
The  castle  itself  is  of  more  than  ordinary  attractive- 
ness, but  within  its  walls  is  crowded  a  marvellous  col- 
lection of  tapestries,  paintings,  armor,  statuary  and 
all  manner  of  works  of  art.  Wonderful  objects,  an- 
cient and  modern,  fill  the  rooms  and  corridors  with 
more  than  pleasing  profusion. 

One  has  the  natural  desire  to  possess  many  an  in- 
teresting bit,  but  hesitates  even  to  offer  the  suggestion, 
with  proper  recompense,  to  so  courteous  a  nobleman. 
A  most  interesting  pair  of  blunderbusses  attract  Mr. 
T ,  who,  although  he  would  have  preferred  some- 
thing more  precious,  concluded  that  in  such  a  profu- 
sion these  modest  objects  might  not  be  missed.  The 
suggestion  reaches  the  ever  attentive  ear  of  "  El 
Sabio,"  who  presently  returns  from  a  rather  heated 
conversation  with  the  "  nobleman,"  to  say  that  "  that 
gentleman  would  not  bother  to  sell  anything  un- 
less a  matter  of  several  thousand  pesetas  was  in- 
volved." 

The  goal  of  all  travel  in  Spain  is  Granada  and  the 
soul  of  Granada  is  the  Alhambra  with  its  lingering 
memories  of  ancient  power  and  splendor. 

The  city  rises  above  the  plain,  and  five  hundred  feet 
higher  still  the  Alhambra  crowns  a  hilltop,  whose 
walls  on  one  side  fall  sheer  to  the  roads  below  while 
from  the  other  a  steep  declivity  leads  to  the  town. 
Around  about  the  buildings  stretches  a  forest  of  won- 
derful beauty,   comprising  full  three  thousand  acres, 
to  which,  repute  has  it,  Lord  Wellington  contributed 
no  mean  share. 

In  wandering  through  the  many  courts,  corridors 
and  halls  of  the  Alhambra  one  loses  himself,  if  not  in 
the  exquisite  beauties  of  the  place,  at  least  in  dreams 
of  its  former  magnificence.  The  mosaics,  the  carving, 
the  painted  walls  and  marble-paved  courts  are  fully  as 
wonderful  as  in  the  Royal  Alcazares  in  Sevilla  but  are 
here  in  even  greater  profusion.  To  my  mind  the  gar- 
den of  the  Alcazares  is  the  one  bright  beauty  spot  in 
inland  Spain,  but  in  the  Alhambra  there  is  infinitely 
more  to  revel  in.  Small  wonder  that  Washington 
Irving  found  such  a  charming  abode  among  the  veiled 
legends  of  the  past,  made  ever  more  real  by  an  intimate 
association  with  their  surroundings. 

The  massive  buildings  of  the  Alhambra  and  the  de- 
tached towers  in  the  walls  cover  a  considerable  area. 
Near  at  hand  is  an  uncompleted  palace  which  Charles 
V.  began,  to  eclipse  anything  of  its  like  in  the  world. 
With  the  huge,  ring-like  structure  of  the  main  part, 
lacking  its  roof,  it  gives  an  impression  of  the  too  com- 
mon Plazas  de  Toros. 

It  is  hoped,  however,  that  Alfonso  will  finish  the 
work  begun  by  his  predecessor  and  thus  add  Spam's 
mite  to  the  crowning  glory  of  the  Alhambra. 

Lingering,  we  watched  the  light  fade  from  the  town 
at  our  feet,  as  the  long  shadows  crept  along  the  val- 
ley, but  as  dusk  obscured  the  streets  below,  the  mina- 
rets and  the  lofty  towers  stood  out  clear  in  the  evening 
light,  while  a  parting  ray  from  the  setting  sun  kissed 
the  hoary  heads  of  the  majestic  Sierras. 

Roused  from  our  meditations,  we  hastened  across 
the  way  to  our  cheery  hostelry  and  were  barely  within 
its  doors  when  we  were  greeted  by  the  elder  Driscolls. 
It  seems  that  the  party  had  followed  our  footsteps 
since  we  parted  from  them  in  Madrid  and  we  at  once 
entered  into  a  lively  comparison  of  our  impressions  of 
the  places  we  had  all  so  recently  seen. 

In  this  fashion  time  passed  quickly,  the  announce- 
ment of  dinner  alone  bringing  a  realization  of  the  hour. 
With  it  Mrs.  Driscoll  remarked  to  her  husband,  "  It 
is  surely  time  they  returned.  I  wonder  what  possibly 
could  have  delayed  them." 

Inferring  that  she  spoke  of  the  rest  of  the  party 
we  inquired  where  they  had  gone  and  were  concerned  to 
learn  that  the  four,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Eng- 
lishman who  had  earlier  visited  Granada,  had  driven  to 
the  gypsy  quarter  of  the  Albaicin. 

Excusing  myself  with  a  casual  remark,  I  at  once 
sought  out  Befiunes,  who  expressed  considerable  anxiety 
at  the  intelligence.  Hastily  throwing  on  his  great 
coat  and  taking  a  heavy  stick  he  bade  me  get  any 
weapon  I  might  have  and  join  him  at  the  side  entrance 
of  the  hotel,  avoiding,  if  possible,  any  of  the  party 
in  so  doing. 

Hurrying  to  my  room  I  dug  out  a  Colt  thirty-eight 
from  my  bag,  and  grabbing  a  loose  handful  of  cart- 
ridges, sauntered  carelessly  down  the  rear  stairway, 
but  as  I  made  for  the  door  ran  plump  into  Mr. 
T . 

Having  no  alternative,  I  explained  the  nature  of  our 
expedition  and  with  difficulty  persuaded  him  to  remain 
and  allay  any  fears  that  the  Driscolls  might  have  if 
they  learned  of  our  departure. 

Benunes  was  impatiently  waiting  in  a  light  two- 
seated  rig  drawn  by  a  pair  of  wiry  little  horses  whose 
driver  I  could  but  dimly  make  out  in  the  poor  light.  As 
I  took  my  seat  beside  him  he  spoke  sharply  and  we 
started  off  at  a  speed  that  would  have  precluded  con- 
versation even  had  we  felt  so  inclined.  As  a  matter  of 
fact  we  were  both  weighed  with  anxiety.  The  gypsy 
quarter  of  the  Albaicin  was  well  known  to  Benunes, 
who  had  often  told  me  of  queer  happenings  to  foreign- 
ers straying  among  them  without  proper  escort.  At 
the  time,  I  had  let  these  tales  pass  as  casual  stories 
circulated  for  the  benefit  of  strangers,  but  as  we 
bumped  across  the  raised  street  over  the  Darro  and 
swung  to  the  right  up  Calle  de  San  Juan,  I  recalled 
vividly  the  atrocities  he  had  spoken  of. 

Following  a  most  perplexing  course,  our  horses  flee- 
ing before  the  merciless  whip  of  the  cochero,  we  turned 
this  way  and  that  at  imminent  risk  of  upsetting,  trav- 
ersing passages  so  narrow  that  it  seemed  as  if  we  must 
stick  between  the  walls  before  we  emerged  into  others 
equally  forbidding.  Presently  the  way  became  more 
steep  and  our  pace  slackened. 

Passing  San  Nicolas  and  San  Salvador,  whose  som- 
bre walls  looked  grim  and  desolate  in  the  dusk,  we 
found  ourselves  in  the  heart  of  the  gypsy  settlement 
and  were  at  once  besieged  by  a  horde  of  ragged  little 
beggars. 

With  Benunes'  stick  effectually  clearing  a  way  we 
jumped  from  the  carriage  and  hurried  up  a  dark  and 
forbidding  road  whose  chief  light  was  furnished  by 
the  openings  to  the  caves  lining  one  side  of  the  ter- 
race— the  only  habitations  about. 

I  have  often  remarked  on  Benunes'  wonderful  knowl- 
edge even  of  the  most  remote  parts  of  his  country,  but 
that  night  it  seemed  as  if  animal  instinct  alone  could 
have  taken  us  where  he  led  without  once  faltering  or 
turning  back. 

Many  looked  at  us  curiously,  and  not  a  few  of  the 
ruffianly  fellows  hanging  around  the  cave  doors  started 
to  follow.  There  is  no  doubt  in  my  mind  that  only 
Benunes'  size  and  vociferous  use  of  their  own  tongue 
saved  us  from  several  encounters,  and  I  must  con- 
fess even  then  that  there  was  a  most  companion- 
able feel  to  the  butt  of  that  Colt  in  my  outside 
pocket. 

Night  had  now  fallen  and  a  cloudy  sky  made  the 
road  look  all  the  more  black  and  menacing.  Soon, 
however,  we  stopped  before  a  more  pretentious  dwell- 
ing, which,  dimly  seen,  appeared  to  be  a  renovation  of 
some  old  stone  palace,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  such 
was  the  case. 

An  illy-dressed  woman  with  long,  unrestrained  black 
hair,  came  into  the  light  of  the  open  door  in  response 
to  our  knock  and  at  a  word  from  Benunes  called  to 
some  one  within.  A  man's  gruff  voice  answered  and 
presently  its  owner  appeared,  a  lithe,  swarthy-looking 
fellow,  fully  as  tall  as  Benunes  but  lacking  his  breadth 
of  shoulder  and  weight. 

Although  I  had  barely  exchanged  a  word  with  the 
courier  since  we  started  and  knew  nothing  definitely 
of  his  plans,  I  instinctively  judged  the  man  before  us 
to  be  the  gypsy  "  king,"  and  so  I  afterwards  found 
to  be  the  case. 

The  conversation  which  followed,  spoken  rapidly, 
partly  in  Spanish  and  at  times  in  the  patois  of  the 
gypsies,  I  could  only  guess  at,  although  the  inflection 
of  the  speakers  and  their  gesticulations  now  and  then 
gave  a  clue. 

It  is  a  curious  fact  that  even  the  mildest  topic  is 
discussed  by  Spaniards  in  a  manner  which  is  seemingly 
the  prelude  to  knives  or  pistols,  and  as  the  voices  of  the 
two  rose  in  the  heat  of  their  talk  I  involuntarily  edged 
closer  with  my  right  hand  held  "  carelessly "  in  my 
pocket. 

Presently  Beiiunes  seemed  to  gain  his  way,  whatever 
that  might  be,  and  the  gypsy,  turning  sharply  on  his 
heel,  was  gone  for  a  moment,  reappearing  with  the 
coat  and  hat  he  had  previously  lacked. 

As  we  threaded  the  dark  terraces,  the  slinking  fig- 
ures fell  back  at  a  growl  or  a  blow  from  our  companion. 
Once  or  twice  we  stopped  while  he  questioned  some  he 
had  recognized.  Other  than  this  we  proceeded  swiftly 
but  in  a  silence  which  to  me,  at  least,  became  tense 
with  suppressed  excitement. 

All  at  once,  directly  before  us,  a  revolver  shot  a 
vicious  white  flame  into  the  darkness,  and  close  upon 
the  report  a  mufHed  voice  called  in  English.  We  broke 
into  a  run. 

Before  us  a  shifting  crowd  were  evidently  preparing 
to  rush  the  closed  door  of  a  cave.  A  dozen  or  so  held 
a  heavy  stake  levelled  at  the  doorway  and  were  just 
gaining  impetus  as  Benunes'  stick  beat  upon  the  fore- 
most, causing  them  to  let  go  their  hold  and  turn  upon 
him. 

I  have  no  doubt  that  fully  half  a  hundred  were  in 
that  dark  mob.  Their  shouts  and  curses  filled  the  air, 
and  even  in  the  darkness  we  caught  the  glint  of  a  knife 
here  and  there. 

They  were  in  a  fine  passion  which  the  manner  of  our 
interruption  was  not  calculated  to  soothe.  For  a 
moment  it  looked  as  though  we  were  in  a  nasty  mess, 
as  Benunes  and  I  backed  to  the  door  with  our  weapons 
ready,  but  just  here  the  "  king  "  began  to  assert  him- 
self, and  it  needed  no  familiarity  with  the  language  to 
sense  the  oaths  and  imprecations  he  hurled  at  them  as 
they  pressed  around  us. 

Once  in  a  close  corner,  south  of  Cape  Cod,  I  was  un- 
der the  impression  that  the  language  of  a  certain  sea- 
captain  was  voluble  and  to  the  point,  but  there  was 
something  about  that  gypsy's  conversation,  in  the 
sharp  hiss  of  his  words  or  the  steely  menace  of  his 
tone,  that  made  your  shoulder  blades  involuntarily 
shrink  together  as  if  a  knife  was  stealing  towards  you 
out  of  the  darkness. 

At  first  angry  voices  answered  him,  but  as  he  took  a 
menacing  step  towards  them  the  crowd  slunk  away 
before  him  and,  like  the  cowards  they  were,  disap- 
peared in  the  darkness. 

As  the  last  muttering  figure  was  lost  we  turned 
to  the  door.  It  swung  back,  and  Dalghren  and  Hale 
appeared  in  the  light  while  close  behind  them  were 
the  strained,  anxious  faces  of  the  two  girls. 

We  gained  the  carrriage  without  mishap  and  near  by 
were  fortunate  to  find  another  rig.  Liberally  reward- 
ing the  "  king,"  and  bidding  him  a  hearty  farewell  we 
set  out  for  the  hotel. 
It  was  agreed  that  Benunes  and  I  should  quietly 
seek  our  rooms  before  the  others  arrived  and  that  no 
mention  be  made  of  the  affair,  which  really  had  had 
no  serious  ending,  notwithstanding  its  possibilities. 
Sometime  should  you  run  across  Miss  Driscoll  again, 
— who  will  not  be  Miss  Driscoll  when  you  see  her, — 
ask  her  to  tell  you  of  her  evening  in  the  Albaicin.  She 
will  undoubtedly  scold  me  should  she  see  this,  but  it 
may  save  some  other  traveller  from  a  similar  experi- 
ence, and  for  that  I  trust  she  will  forgive  me. 
