CHAPTER I—THE FASCINATION OF SPAIN


But it is among the women that the resemblance stands out most clearly.
There are women with dark long African faces.  You will see them among
the _flamencas_ of Seville, or in the gipsy quarter of the Camino del
Sacro Monte at Granada—women with slow, sinuous movements, which you
notice best when you see them dance, and wonderful eyes that flash a slow
fire, quite unforgettable in their strange beauty.

It is in the gardens of Spain that the stranger will find best the
reflection of the Moorish spirit.  The Moors made their cities places of
gardens and waters.  The very names that they gave to their pleasure
places speak of joy.  “The Meadow of Murmuring Waters,” “The Garden of
the Water-wheel”—what magic lingers in the suggestion of the words!

Many of these old gardens have perished.  Cordova has lost all except its
Orange Court and the old garden of the ruined Alcázar.  In Seville the
parks are new.  But in Granada the gardens have triumphed over the
devastations of the Christians; and it is one of the exquisite surprises
of the place to come suddenly on some fragment of a delicious garden
where the Moorish tradition lives almost undisturbed.

There are few cities, even in Spain, that hold so many gardens.  There is
the Alameda of the Alhambra, the green garden which lies around the
Moorish citadel; the _paseos_ on the banks of the Genil, planted with
trees and cooled by fountains, the pleasure-grounds of the people; and
the Jardín de los Adarves, on the south terrace of the Alhambra hill, a
trellised retreat, with climbing vines and flowers, and splendid view of
Vega and distant snow-capped hills.  Everyone will find in these gardens
something that makes special appeal to him.

But the most exquisite haunt even among the gardens of Granada is the
Generalife—the summer palace of the Moorish Princes, at the foot of the
Cerro de Sol, and to the east of the Alhambra hill.  Here you have the
charm of small and perfect gardens laid out in terraces, with great
clipped cypresses, myrtles, and orange-trees, and the glow of flowers,
with that of the delicate Moorish architecture, of richly coloured tiles
and rare inscriptions.  And everywhere is the joyous sound of flowing
water; the fountains are always playing, and water runs in channels made
of inverted tiles placed on the top of the balustrades.  One of the
charms of Moorish life was the love of pure water.

An old legend says that the name Generalife in Arabic signifies the
“house of love, of dancing, and of pleasure,” and, further, that it was
built by one Omar, a passionate lover of music, that he might retire here
and entirely give himself up to that amusement.  The story is probably
untrue, and the name, as the chronicles state, is a corruption of the
Arabic “Djennat-al’-Arif,” which means “the garden of Arif.”  But romance
so often is more beautiful than fact.  One likes to think that this
exquisite palace and gardens were designed as a place wherein a man could
give his soul to music.

“Charming place!  Thy garden is embellished with flowers which repose
upon their stalks and exhale the sweetest perfumes; fresh air agitates
the orange-trees and spreads abroad the sweet odour of its blossoms.  I
hear voluptuous music joined to the rustling of the leaves of thy grove.
Everything around is harmonious, green, and flowering.”

Such is part of the inscription upon the arcades of the Garden of the
Pond, and how perfectly the rich imagery of the words conveys the charm
of the garden!  The Generalife has kept more than any place in Spain its
Moorish character, combining in its palace and garden, in spite of decay
and alterations, much of that full suggestion of all beautiful things
that was their gift.

In Spain dancing is something more than an amusement; it is a serious art
closely connected with religious ritual, which expresses, perhaps as
nothing else does, if we except the bull-fight, the true spirit of the
people.  The dances are Eastern in their origin; they are dramas of love,
and especially those of the Gitanas, who have adopted and kept living the
ancient dances of the country.

Seville, the joyous southern capital, is the city that has given its own
spirit to the most beautiful of the Spanish dances.  Granada and Malaga
are also centres of dancing, and sometimes good performances may be
witnessed at Madrid.  But the best _cafés cantantes_, where the true
Spanish dancers perform, are hidden in back streets where the foreigner
does not readily find them.  These dances are national ceremonies and
belong to the people, and are far different from the dances, often quite
modern in character, that are given at the popular _cafés_.  The
varieties are numerous, and the names are often confusing.  Many dances
date back far into antiquity, while almost all owe their special
character to Arabic influences.

The _bolero_ is the most aristocratic dance.  “What majesty, what
decorum, what distinction!” cried Valera, speaking of the dances of Ruiz
and his daughter Conchita.  It is danced by a man and a woman, and is a
kind of drama between them; both use castanets.  It is a slow dance of
deliberate grace and fascination.  The _jota_ is danced by a woman alone.
This dance, too, is a love drama of intense passion, but always decorous,
always beautiful.  Both these dances are native to Andalusia, the
province of Spanish dancing.  Outside of Andalusia, the most famous dance
is the Aragonese _jota_.  This is danced by a man and a woman, and the
castanets are used.  But the drama is different, the movements are
quicker and less varied, and there is great vivacity.  It seems a kind of
combat between the two dancers; it is more a drama of battle than a drama
of love.

But the most typical of all Spanish dancing is the _flamenco_ dance of
the Gitanas, which you will see best at Seville; it is the most primitive
and the most African of all.  A group of performers sit in a semicircle
upon a small stage.  The spectators all take their part by a rhythmic
clapping of hands and stamping feet.  One of the performers—generally a
man—plays the guitar and sings an accompanying song.  A dancer rises
suddenly, spontaneously, as if seized by the passion of the music.  She
wears a long dress, usually of white, and a beautiful Manilla shawl is
folded on her shoulders.  How can one describe the dance which is so
unlike all other dances?  It is not a dance of the feet; every part of
the body plays its share in the performance: the swaying figure, the
beckoning hands, the glittering smiles that come and go in the dark
eyes—all contribute.  The dancer is alive to her fingertips, and every
expressive movement has the Spanish simplicity of emphasis.  At first the
movement is slow, then faster, and now increases and rises to a passion
of intensity.  And all the time the spectators are actively
participating, their emotion rising with the dancer’s emotion; their
rhythmic clapping and beating of feet grows louder as the drama proceeds,
and cries of long-drawn-out _oles_ stimulate the dancer.  The dance ends
as unexpectedly as it began: a pause comes, and the swaying body is
still, as if languor had followed on strong emotion.  There is silence;
the dancer goes back to her seat.  Then the singer starts a new song, the
clapping is taken up again, another dancer comes forward, and a new drama
is acted.

The foreigner who would understand Spain must see these dances; then he
will come to know yet another characteristic of the people—their love of
strong, quite elemental sensation.  It is this that so often makes them
seem cruel to us.

This delight of the Spaniard in all emotions that make sharp appeal to
the senses explains the existence of the bull-fight, the national sport,
which is so much a part of the life of the people that, although to-day
there is a widespread movement to repress, or at least to mitigate, its
cruelty, it seems unlikely that its real attraction will cease.

It is impossible not to condemn the bull-fight; its cruelty cannot be
denied.  It is brutal, as the most cultivated Spaniards themselves admit.
And yet there are certain facts that the stranger must remember before he
condemns.  The bull-fight, like the dance, is a solemn ritual rather than
an amusement.  The combats take place on Sunday, while the most famous
form part of the ceremonies of Holy Week.  Part of the proceeds are
devoted to some religious object—a charity or other holy work.  Almost
all the great bull-rings have a chapel where the fighters first prepare
themselves in prayer and partake of the Holy Eucharist.  To the foreigner
it may seem that this union of religion and bull-fighting is incongruous,
but to most Spaniards it does not appear so.

The bull-fight is the Spaniard’s strongest, most characteristic
intoxication.  The poor man will sell his shirt to buy a ticket for the
bull-ring.  They are a profoundly serious people, but every incident
connected with their national sport arouses them into vivid life.  I
remember on one occasion, when travelling in Andalusia in an open
third-class railway carriage, the train passed a _vacada_, or
training-place of bulls to be used in the ring.  The effect was magical.
These quiet, sombre people sprang upon the seats, some leaned far out of
the windows; they gesticulated, they waved their sombreros, they called
the names of the bulls, they cheered, they shouted.  Never had I seen the
decorous Spaniard so strongly moved.

The _toreros_ are the idols of the Spanish people.  You will see them
best at Seville, in their faultless tight _majo_ costumes and frilled
shirts, fastened with diamond studs, and diamond rings on the fingers of
their faultless hands, and with their pigtail fastened upon the top of
their heads.  There is something splendidly attractive in their perfect
bodily equipoise, with every muscle trained to faultless precision.  The
_toreros_ have in the highest degree strength, agility, and grace.  Even
women have been _toreros_ and Madame Dieulafoy tells of one _Doña_, Maria
de Gaucin, who left her convent to become a _torero_; then, after gaining
renown throughout Spain for her exploits in the bull-ring, returned to
the practices of religion.  Only in Spain would such division of a life
be thought perfectly natural, perfectly seemly.

The bull-fight was established in Spain in the eleventh or twelfth
century, and is of Moorish origin.  The bull would also seem to have come
first from Africa.  But the spectacular and ceremonial character of the
contest is certainly adapted from the Roman combats, the influence of
which had survived among the old Spaniards.

Every Spanish town has its Plaza de Toros.  Here, and especially at
Seville during the Easter festival, you will see all the population of
the place, a motley crowd of men and women.  Señoras in white lace
_mantillas_ and white dresses, and their cavaliers, the gay _Sevillanos_,
side by side with the _gente flamenca_ and the _cigarreras_ in lovely
shawls, their hair elaborately arranged, with a white flower showing
against its blackness; for the bull-fight is a democratic institution,
where the greatest foregather with the people.  The patience of the vast
crowd is perfect as they await the advent of the appointed hour.  All are
animated with a suppressed seriousness, the prelude to violent emotion
which is so characteristic of the Spaniard.

The entire performance is carried out with an elaborate ceremony of
detail which the stranger often finds difficult to appreciate.  The
President enters his _palco_.  Then follows the _paseo de la cuadrilla_,
the processional entrance of the bull-fighters, grave, handsome men, in
their beautiful and varied costumes of yellow and violet, gold and green,
or whatever the chosen colours may be.  The procession moves slowly
across the ring; there is no haste.  Each one in turn gravely and with
perfect grace salutes the President, who then throws down the key of the
bulls’ den, the _toril_.  In a few moments the first bull rushes into the
arena.  The combat has begun.

The fight is divided into three acts.  In the _Suerte de Picar_, the
first, the _picadores_, dressed in round felt hats, short cloaks, and
long leggings of plaited steel, and mounted on blindfolded horses, in
turn receive the charge of the bull, thrusting him aside with their long
pikes.  Sometimes they come to close quarters, a _picador_ is thrown, his
horse is wounded, or perhaps killed.  The shouts of the now excited crowd
show that this is the critical moment.  The _picador_ rises quickly,
another horse is brought, while the _chulos_ divert the attention of the
bull by dexterous waving of their brightly coloured cloaks.  When the
bull is sufficiently wearied—for this is the object of the first act in
the drama—the President gives a signal, and the _picadores_ retire.

The _banderilleros_ take their place.  This is the _Suerte de
Banderillear_, the second act, the object of which is to inflame the
bull.  The _banderilleros_ place the barbed darts, or _banderillas_, in
the shoulders of the bull.  Each is about 2 feet long, of curious device,
and ornamented with long coloured streamers.  It is the most exciting
part of the combat.  The utmost skill, agility, and daring, are needed to
plant the darts.  There must be no bungling, no second of hesitation.  It
is now that the excitement of the spectators is really aroused, for a
sense of solemnity is given by the possible presence of death.  A
_banderillero_ may be seen to seize hold of the lashing tail, swing
himself along the beast’s side, and plant his dart between its horns.  It
is done with surprising skill, with delight, and with passion; and the
applause of the spectators swells to a great roar, which refuses to be
silenced.

The last act is the _Suerte de Matar_.  The chief _espada_ comes into the
ring; to him belongs the honour of the death.  First he approaches the
President, and solemnly dedicates to him the slaying of the bull.  He is
armed with a short Toledan blade and the _muleta_, a small red cloth.
Calmly he walks towards the bull.  And now a silence falls upon the
hitherto raging crowd.  It is the moment of pause, of silent waiting for
the most violent emotion of all.  First he plays with the now infuriated
and wearied beast.  There is still no hurrying.  The Spaniard wishes
always to gain the very utmost out of his sensations.  The bull is teased
by the waving of the red cloth, and in this way is made to take the
proper position for the death-blow.  The _espada_ watches his moment;
then, with unerring decision, he buries the blade in the bull’s neck
between the shoulders, and walks slowly to the President’s box, with
absolute composure and a dignity that is almost defiant.  Deafening
cheers greet him, rewards and costly tributes are thrown, and he is
presented with a great bouquet of flowers.  How Spanish is this ending,
which rewards the slayer with flowers!

It is over; the ring is cleared, sand is raked over the pools of blood, a
new bull is driven forward, again the drama begins.  Six times the scene
is re-acted, and a seventh bull, a _toro de gracia_, is added at the
first bull-fight of the year.
In this repetition of emotions, this delight in heaping up sensations, we
have a very real revelation of the Spanish temperament.  And this
explains the devotion of the people to the bull-fight.  When we come to
estimate the Spanish character, we shall find that the Spaniard has the
qualities which belong to all primitive people.  The sentiment of
sympathy with suffering is essentially a modern one.  The Spaniard is
still the Moor, his ancestor.  He is cruel because he is indifferent to
pain, his own or another’s.

CHAPTER II—THE SPANISH PEOPLE

The Spaniards have always shown an interest in blood and a satisfaction
in shedding it.  Two centuries ago it was a common custom for lovers to
scourge themselves in the streets during Holy Week, to win admiration
from their mistresses.  The Spaniard still gains the approval of his
women by feats of daring, and the bull-fighter is the idol of the people.

It would seem, then, that in the Spanish character there is not only an
indifference to pain, but an actual delight in the emotion of suffering,
which prevents an understanding of cruelty.  It is the temperament that
makes the martyr and the fanatic.  I remember on one occasion some boys
were torturing a young bird, which one boy held by a string tied to its
leg.  I offered to buy the bird for a few _reales_.  At once it was given
to me, and I set it free.  But what was the result?  In less than an hour
some twenty birds had been caught, fastened to strings, and were brought
to me.  No payment was asked: the birds were a gift to the foreign
señora.  The boys had not understood at all that I disliked their
cruelty; they thought that I had a strange fancy for captive birds.

The incident is characteristic of what the stranger will meet constantly
in Spain.  Your driver will flog his mules with the butt-end of his
whip—yes, beat them till they fall.  If you remonstrate, he will smile,
rarely will he be angry; but never will you make him understand.  Once
during a long drive I gained respite for a team of mules at the cost of a
bribe of two pesetas.  I know that driver pitied my foolishness.

Yet, let there be no mistake, the Spaniard is not without the tenderer
emotions of humanity.  And, after all one has heard of Spanish cruelty,
it is interesting to note the signs of gentleness and kindness that meet
one in many unexpected ways.  I have never seen any other people so
friendly with one another.  The home life of the people, be they rich or
poor, is charming, with a standard of kindness that compares favourably
with that of other countries.  Domestic crimes are comparatively
infrequent.  The Spaniard is known for his considerate love for children,
and the relations between parents and children are universally happy.  In
no country does less stigma fall upon a child who is born out of wedlock.
One of the strongest impressions I gained during my stay in the Peninsula
was the happiness of the charming children.  It is noteworthy that the
first hospital for the insane was established in the country of the
bull-ring.  The practice of allowing counsel to poor persons in criminal
cases is of much older origin than in our own country.  The pest of
beggars is another witness to this softness in their character; the
Spaniard feels that it is inhuman to refuse alms.

It is when the Spaniard comes into personal relationships that his real
native kindness appears.  For his friend he is ready to sacrifice his
life—a quality which Strabo notes as belonging to the ancient Iberians.
You will often meet with a curious mingling of cruelty and kindness in
the same individual.  I recall a characteristic incident.  An artist
friend was sketching in a small town in the province of Old Castile, and
upon one occasion was greatly annoyed by a lad who threw sand upon the
wet canvas, thereby showing, I suppose, his hostility to the foreigner,
whose actions he did not understand and therefore disliked.  The artist,
rather than contend with his rudeness, left the spot and returned home.
By mistake a small purse-bag was left behind.  The boy found it, and
followed with it to the hotel.  What a change!  There was no rudeness
now; instead, a real pleasure in rendering a service.  Smiling and
bowing, the persecutor of half an hour before returned the purse with the
fine Spanish courtesy, refusing to receive any reward.

It is these seemingly contradictory impulses that puzzle the stranger in
estimating the Spanish character.  But the truth is, that the deep-rooted
conservatism of the race has kept alive in the Spaniard of to-day the
qualities that belong to primitive peoples.  Mr. Havelock Ellis, the
English writer who has best understood the Spanish spirit, says truly:
“The Spaniard is, and remains to-day, in the best sense of the word, a
savage.”  The Spanish nature is elemental, and responds to all the
emotions that touch the elemental passions: love, religion, war—these are
the emotions that stir life into action.

Much of what is characteristic of the life of the people may be studied
in the _Feria_, the great spring festival, which is held at Seville each
year in the middle of April.  From all parts of Spain people flock to the
southern city, and for three days at this national picnic they make
holiday together.  In the Prado de San Sebastian streets of wooden
pavilions, or _casetas_, have been erected, consisting mainly of one
room, which is furnished with chairs, a piano, and beautiful flowers.
Here on each day the families of Seville assemble in their own _caseta_,
and pass the joyous hours in receiving guests, dancing, guitar-playing,
and singing.  One side of the _caseta_ is entirely open, so that all can
see the company within.  The women and the older men sit upon the chairs;
the _majos_, in faultless costume, stand about, each smoking his
cigarette; the children, brilliant, fascinating little people, play in
front.  Some of the women, and many children, are dressed in the old
Andalusian costume, with black lace over bright yellow silk; all the
women wear _mantillas_ upon their hair.  Fans are fluttering everywhere;
there is a soft tinkling of guitars.  Dark eyes flash upon you, and red
lips part in smiles as you stand and look within.  It is a family party,
carried out with a publicity that seems strange to us, but is perfectly
natural to the Spaniard.  At the _Feria_ everyone is accepted as a
friend.  Someone clicks a pair of castanets, and a beautiful girl gets up
to dance the _seguidilla_, that most graceful dance which every
Andalusian child is taught.  The effect on the company is magical.  How
animated they are! every face is smiling.  Their chairs are drawn in a
circle around the dancer, whom they applaud with rhythmic clapping.  It
is the seguidilla, with its gracious memories, which gives life to the Feria.

In another part of the fair the Gitanas have their tents.  All the women
from Triana and the Macarena are here, amusing themselves simply and
quietly with a joyous decorum.  Some of the Gitana women are remarkably
handsome; all have superb hair, and the gay colours of their dresses give
brightness to the scene.  There is dancing here, too, the _flamenco_
dances, with slow movements and passionate suggestion of love, and the
noise of the constant clapping of the spectators.

On the outskirts, in the open space of the Prado, are flocks of sheep and
goats, and droves of bullocks, horses, mules, and donkeys, tended by
picturesque herdsmen and muleteers in the dress of the several provinces.
_Caballeros_ ride their horses up and down to show off their points.  The
vendors haggle and chaffer with the buyers, for all the animals are for
sale; but all is good-natured, there is no quarrelling.  At intervals
there are little _ventas_, or refreshment booths, where the people buy a
_refresco_.  Families are camping and picnicking on the grass.  Others
are seated on chairs arranged in a circle around the couple who rise to
dance.  At a little distance there are swings for the children.  The
noise is great—the Spaniards delight in loud sounds—concertinas and
barrel-organs, the sounds from the castanets of the dancers, and the loud
clapping of hands, mingling with the cries of the _aguadores_ and the
vendors of shell-fish and chestnuts.  Here, too, everyone is happy; but
you will not see one drunken or quarrelsome person; among all the people
there is a friendly, good-natured content.

“Seville,” it has been said, “lights up for a _fiesta_ as a face lights
up with a smile.”  And evening is the time at which the _Feria_ looks its
best.  The great iron tower in the centre of the park is brilliantly
illuminated, and the avenues of _casetas_, radiating in every direction,
are softly lighted with thousands of fairy lights, electric lamps, and
Chinese lanterns; in each a different scheme of colour prevails.  The
soft warm air is fragrant with the scent of the blossoming orange-trees.
In each _caseta_ there is a dancer, and from the open doors eager faces
look out upon the passers-by.  The sound of castanets and guitars is
heard in every direction.  The broad walks are filled with people, an
unending stream, slowly walking up and down.  This is the true Spain,
idle, joyous, brilliant, happily content, making the very most of life
with the fine acceptance that is the gift of the Sevillians.

It is this spirit which the Spaniards have brought into their
religion—the understanding that joy is a part of worship.  And although
Seville is not a religious city as Toledo and Valencia are, it is here
that the splendid ceremonies of the Church are carried out with more
detail and spectacular appeal than in any city in Spain.  The Sevillians
have made the ritual of their religion a part of their life’s enjoyment.

Nothing shows this better than the strange mediæval custom of the
_Seises_, the sacred dances which take place in the cathedral on the
Feast of the Immaculate Conception, and on that of Corpus Christi.  The
sixteen _seises_, or choristers, dance in front of the high-altar, using
castanets and singing in the most charming and graceful minuet fashion.
It is perfectly dignified, perfectly religious, and the young dancers
perform without a suspicion of levity.  There is something specially
characteristic of the Spaniards’ attitude towards religion in thus making
dancing a part of the sacred ritual of the Church.  Just as the
bull-fight is carried out as a solemn ceremony, so dancing, the people’s
strongest passion, finds its place in the service of the house of God.
To the stranger it is an astonishing ceremony, a witness to the pagan
element that lives so persistently in the Spaniard—the cause of those
sharp contrasts that surprise us in his character.

All Spain gathers in Seville to take part in the great festival, which is
held during the _Semana Santa_, the Holy Week of Easter.  It is the
people’s holiday as truly as is the _Feria_; both are “holy days.”

The most characteristic of the ceremonies are the religious processions,
which take place on each day during the week, and all day long on Good
Friday.  At Granada and many other towns the Church processions have been
given up; but at Seville the custom remains unchanged from the Middle
Ages.  The whole city is given up to the _pasos_, vehicular traffic is
stopped, all business ceases.  Everyone, from the Archbishop and the
_Alcalde_ downwards, assembles in the public squares, where seats are
erected, in the streets, or in the balconies and windows of the houses,
to witness the performance.  It is an amazing sight, this multitude
gathered to watch the procession of an image!  But the Spaniards give
themselves up to it with simple abandonment.  Nothing seen in Spain will
give so true an impression of the part that religion takes in the life of
the people.  The stranger will feel himself carried back at least three
centuries.

The _pasos_, which are carried in these processions, consist of a single
sacred figure, or a group of figures illustrating a scene from the
Passion.  Many of the statues have real beauty; they are the work of
Montañés, the seventeenth-century sculptor, whose polychrome carvings
express so perfectly the Spanish religious spirit.  Borne by twenty-five
invisible carriers, at an extremely slow pace, the sacred groups pass
through the streets of the city.  Each _paso_ is followed by the members
of the _cofradia_, or brotherhood, to whom the statue belongs.  They are
dressed in the costume of their Order, the long gown, usually of white
cloth, with the peaked cowl covering the head.  Each brother carries a
lighted candle.  Companies of acolytes, white and scarlet robed, swing
censers and chant anthems.  A line of gendarmes, in capes of vivid red,
march in advance to clear the way.  Women clad in white walk beside them;
barefooted, they are fulfilling a vow.  The sacred figures, and
especially the Virgin, to whom the chivalrous Spaniard has always
rendered his homage, are vested in rich gowns of silk and velvet,
enriched with jewels of such great price that a soldier with drawn sword
walks on guard behind.  The platforms on which the statues rest are
thickset with lighted tapers and laden with flowers.

The slow procession proceeds through the densely crowded streets and
squares to the accompaniment of solemn music, with which mingle the
_vivas_ and _bravas_ of the spectators.  Before the doors of the City
Hall there is a pause to greet the _Alcalde_, who rises from his velvet
chair.  Then the procession passes onwards through the reverent,
bare-headed crowd to the cathedral.  The women, black-robed and with
black _mantillas_, in the balconies, where rows of lamps and candles
burn, rise in reverence.  One and another sings an ardent petition, with
eyes fastened on the sacred figure.  Now a young girl presses forward in
the crowd with a gift of marigolds, which are placed at the Virgin’s
feet.

There is a completeness and simplicity in the worship, the great crowd,
rich and poor, women and men, all moved by one strong emotion.  And the
spell of the strange scene penetrates the spirit; one forgets its pagan,
mediæval childishness; one begins to understand how these outward symbols
have had power to hold the faith of the people.

The cathedral is the chief centre of all the ceremonies; and the vast
edifice—Santa Maria is the largest Gothic church in the world—which is
not too vast for its part in the great functions, is seen best on these
days of festival.  The gold and silver plate, all the splendid Church
treasures—silver candelabra beyond counting, jewelled censers, chalices,
and crosses, golden keys and diamond stars, Arfe’s rich and delicate
monstrance—have been laid out by the side of the great altar.  Crimson
drapings cover the walls; the priests wear their _terno celeste_,
vestments of blue and gold.  The great doors are wide open, and all day
long the people come and go in endless procession, as the pageants of the
_pasos_ arrive and then depart.  The Mass, with its elaborate ritual, is
sung to the Spanish music of Eslava; the Sacrament is borne in priestly
procession.  Each day has its special function.  On Palm Sunday is the
consecration of the palms and olive branches; on Maundy Thursday the
typical Spanish ceremony of the washing of feet takes place; on Good
Friday there is the Passion Sermon; and on Saturday the _Cirio Pascual_,
the great candle, 25 feet high and 770–880 pounds in weight, is
consecrated.

All the days the cathedral is filled with relays upon relays of
worshippers: some kneel upon the bare stones, one by one or in groups
together; some stand; others sit on the chairs they have brought with
them.  The black dresses and _mantillas_ of the women mingle with the
bright colours of the peasants who have come from the country districts.
There is something social, well-nigh domestic, in the scene.  In the
intervals between their devotions the women chatter loudly together and
use their fans; children play about as if in their own homes; even dogs
and cats are there, quite unmolested.  The Spaniard is wholly at home in
his church, which to him is so much a part of the world and his daily
life that he can talk, eat, sleep, and transact business, there.

As the week advances an indescribable emotion grows, which culminates on
the Saturday, when, at ten o’clock in the morning, the Veil of the Temple
is rent in twain.  The great purple curtain, which has hung in front of
Roldan’s beautiful Christ upon the Cross, is sharply drawn by hidden
cords.  The signal is given; all the bells of the city ring out joyously,
the great organ peals forth jubilees of victory, _Gloria in Excelsis_
soars out in choral chants.  It is the moment of supreme emotion.  The
multitude falls upon its knees before the great symbol of the
accomplished Passion.

This is the end of the Holy Week ceremonies.  The women put off their
black, and now appear in white lace _mantillas_ and dresses predominantly
white.  In the afternoon the children’s festival of the lambs takes
place.  Then on Easter Sunday the bull-fight is celebrated.

CHAPTER III—TOWN LIFE IN SPAIN

Toledo has remained as the Moors built it, a tortuous network of cobbled
alleys, as was most fitting in a city built upon rock, scorched by sun in
summer, and in winter swept with icy winds.  The tall houses, rising in
straight upward lines like an arrangement of flat walls, are almost all
windowless on the side next to the street; where there is a window it is
barred and closely latticed, and the high gates are studded with iron
bosses and seem to forbid an entrance.  No sight of the tree-shaded court
is given, as at Seville and Cordova.  No one appears to go in and out of
these doors.  Every house has the aspect of a prison; they all look as if
they had histories.

In Cordova, and even in Granada, you are less sharply conscious of the
Moorish influence.

Time, the tamer of proud cities, has shadowed Granada, and to visit it is
to understand the desolation of conquest.  The big hotels, placed so
incongruously near to the Alhambra, the clamorous guides, the beggars—all
the disagreeable conditions of a show city that trades on its past are
here.  The efforts of recent years, that have developed a certain amount
of industrial activity, have not lessened this impression; for modern
enterprise seems strangely out of place in Granada, while the attempts to
improve the old city, such as the boulevard which has been driven through
its centre, have been left unfinished, with a result of added desolation.
In the air itself there seems something of decay, as the white mists from
the snowy heights of the Sierra Nevada rest shroud-like upon the _vega_.
Always you seem to catch an echo of that _ultimo suspiro del Moro_.
Ruins meet you everywhere; only the gardens in Granada have kept the
charm of their exquisite beauty.

But there is one possession that conquest has left to Granada.  It is to
see the Alhambra that everyone comes to the city, which is but a setting
to this Moorish jewel.  And in the wooded garden, which lies around the
citadel, where nightingales sing, and flowers embroider the grass, and
the sound of running water is always heard, Granada, with its memories of
ruin, seems shut off as by a veil of quiet.  The Alhambra is the supreme
pearl of Moorish art in Spain.  It is bewildering in the appeal of its
strange beauty.  It is like an invocation of an Eastern sorcerer, and as
you wander in its courts and halls the Thousand and One Nights seem true.
It is hardly conceivable that people lived here.  You seem to understand
the brilliant dominion of the Moors in Spain.  Only people with a history
like theirs could have reigned here; life lived here could but have been
a romance.

The first impression you gather from the almost bewildering beauty is how
any building so seemingly fragile can be so strong.  More than five
centuries have passed since the Alhambra was built.  The repeated
earthquakes which did so much damage to Granada, and laid in ruin the
Renaissance palace of Charles V., have been powerless to destroy this
most delicate of architectural structures.  To-day the Alhambra is kept
as a show-place, rejuvenated by the restorer.  But even this has not been
able to dim the exquisite beauty of its courts and halls.  And all the
jewelled weaving of ornaments, so difficult to grasp as being quite real,
have kept much of their splendour.  It almost seems as though the common
superstition were true, and that the charm of Fate does guard the Red
Palace of the Moors.

Cordova suffers from the memory of a past greatness which she cannot now
support.  Gautier describes the city as _le squelette blanché et
calciné_.  Cordova is a city in sleep; it rests in a quiet and beautiful
dream.  Here the Eastern spirit of acceptance echoes with an unsilenced
voice.  And this is why the sensitive stranger will find such perfect
satisfaction in the white city’s sleeping peace.  Cordova was the town
that I most loved in Spain.

But the tourist goes to Cordova in haste to visit the mosque.  “Mezquita?
Mezquita?”  Each Cordovese you encounter will surmise your desire and
direct you without question.  They know that this imperishable building
is the one interesting lion in their city; it is to visit it that the
stranger comes to Cordova.

The great mosque is a “wonder of the world,” the one perfectly satisfying
building left in the city of the Khalif, the Cordova that was known as
“the Bride of Andalusia.”  This Church of the Divine Wisdom is the most
complete expression in building that the Moors have left in Spain, more
even than the Alhambra.  It is one of the buildings that sum up the
genius of a people, the experience of a race, and the teaching of a
school.

In the Outer Court of Oranges, where the water of the fountains and the
leafy shade of the orange-trees give delicious coolness from the blazing
heart of the sun, you will find the untiring charm and dreamy peace of
Oriental repose.  You will see the women of Cordova gathered around the
great _almîda_ fountain with their red-brown pitchers to fill.  You will
hear them chattering, telling the news of the day.  Now and then will
come a sound of laughter as a youth, also with a vessel to fill, joins
them.  The women will leave their pitchers and go into the mosque, one by
one or in groups together, for prayer is a part of the day’s work.
Figures move slowly up and down the cloisters; they are the Canons; each
will be smoking a cigarette.  Groups of beggars crouch on the low stone
seats; they seem quite content in the sun.  At the hour of service a band
of acolytes will come from the chancery and cross the court slowly to the
mosque, making a line of scarlet.  And presently there will be a soft
sound of music as the boys sing the _coplas_ in honour of the Virgin.
Yes, the Court of Oranges is the most perfect spot in Cordova, to which
the stranger will come again and again.

And when you go into the mosque itself, you will pass out of the
colonnades of orange-trees into colonnades of stone.  Before you, around
you, everywhere, a forest of columns; and the canopy of curves above you,
formed by the double rows of crossed fantastic arches, will seem like the
interlacing branches of great trees.  You will remember those enchanted
forests you dreamed of as a child.  In truth, the architecture of the
mosque is like a living thing.  The light, entering from above, plays
upon the arches, causing the red stones to gleam like fire; it frets the
thousand columns with moving patterns; it catches the glass mosaics in
jewelled brilliance, and makes a soft shining upon the marble pavement,
in which, as you look up and down, you see the long arcades reflected
until the distance dies away, mysterious and apparently unending.

But words cannot describe this wonderful temple.  The Moorish houses of
prayer will bring you a sense of joy: there is nothing of the mystic
suggestion of a Gothic cathedral—that of Seville, for instance; your
spirit is freed, not awed.  The mosque was to the Moor this world as well
as the next.  Here is the message of a race who understood the fulness of
living so well that they knew how to be joyously at home with their God;
and you realize more fully this lesson that the Moors gave to Spain,
which finds its expression to-day in the Spaniard’s happy familiarity
with his God.

The stranger will now be ready to understand the special atmosphere of
Seville, for it is this frank acceptance of joy as the gold thread of
life which gives the southern city its charm.  It is not shadowed with
memory like sleeping Cordova, nor is it overburdened with heroic
monuments like Toledo; there are no ruins such as give sadness to
Granada; it is still a living city whose blood is pulsing with the joy of
life lived in the sunshine.

The buildings for which the city is famous all have this aspect of
joy—the Moorish Tower of Gold; the Alcázar, with its flower-crowded
gardens; the Giralda Tower, which is so old, and yet in its glittering
whiteness looks so new.  There is a joyousness in these buildings that I
have never seen in the buildings of any other city.

Then, Seville is alive commercially, and from its wharves among the
orange-trees which line the banks of its rivers vessels carry away its
wine, its oil, and its oranges.

Seville has no rival among the cities of Spain.  The old saying is still
true: “To him whom God loves He gives a home in Seville.”

In Seville you are happy without seeking to be so, and when the stranger
has learnt this he has learnt the secret of the _Sevillanos_.

Seville has the aspect of a city given up to a holiday humour; and if I
wished to describe the special quality of her happy people, I should say
that they understood perfectly the difficult art of loafing.  You must be
happy to loaf successfully; that is why Northern people find it so
difficult.  But not even the Venetians loaf as well as the _Sevillanos_.
Go to the Calle de las Sierpes, that narrow, animated street, the centre
of Seville’s joyous life; it is different from other streets; its gay
shops, with the double row of irregular, close-drawn windows that make a
sinuous line of light—certainly it is like a serpent.  All day and far
into the night people saunter up and down its pavements or sit in one of
the many _cafés_, which are always filled with crowds of unoccupied
persons.  You will seem to be watching a stage play.  It is here that you
will see best the _majos_, or dandies of Seville; in springtime there is
sure to be a _matador_ strolling about in splendid costume, and women in
_mantillas_ saunter to and fro with their slow, graceful walk.

In the _cafés_ you will have an opportunity of studying the typical
Andalusian.  He wears a short coat and very tight trousers of a light
colour, and a felt hat with a broad, flat brim.  He is always
clean-shaven, and his hair is cut very short.  These men are often
handsome, and have a striking expression of strength; the faces,
dignified and always humorous, often resemble a comic actor.  They are an
affectionate and friendly company, and their conversation echoes with a
deafening buzz.  Notice the way in which they smoke their cigarettes, and
at intervals drink their _refrescos_ or sip from their small glasses of
_aguardiente_.  Their enjoyment is so Spanish, so epicurean.  And women
in the street fan themselves in the same way.  All these people are happy
in the frank acceptance of life as it is.

Inside the shops, which have doors wide open to the street, groups of
women sit to buy fans and _mantillas_.  Making purchases is a delightful
game, in which all Spanish women excel.  They smile, and chatter, and use
their fans, bargaining with delicious grace, while the salesman,
cigarette in hand, shrugs his shoulders and gesticulates.

“But the _mantilla_ is dear, señor.”

He throws out his hands in protest.

“No, señorita; I am giving it away at ten _pesetas_.”

“Is the quality good?” and she raises her eyebrows in bewitching
incredulity.

“As good as God’s blessing.”

And with mutual smiles and salutations the purchase is made.

It is in the Paseo de las Delicias—the name will tell you of the beauty
of this park, with its orange-groves, hedges of blue aloes, and all
manner of tropical trees and flowers—that the ladies of Seville drive and
promenade each afternoon.  The _majos_ cast languishing glances upon them
as they walk to and fro, and compliments are given: “Oh, Jesus, what an
air!”  “Happy is the mother that bore thee!”  “Your eyes are as runaway
stars that would rather shine in your face than in the heavens!”

The _Sevillanas_ smile and chatter together; this play of love is a part
of the accustomed homage which is their due.

There is a fascination about Spanish women not easy to define.  Many of
them are not beautiful, but they are always graceful, and they all walk
beautifully.  Then, most of them have the soft, expressive eyes which the
East has bequeathed to Spain.  There is a quality and certain finish
about them which is unique; each one looks as if she understood that she
was a woman, and was very glad that this was so.  Perhaps this is why
they are so attractive; this is the reason, too, why the old women are so
good-humoured, smiling, and gay.  The indefinite unquietness that so
often characterizes English and American women is entirely absent.  These
Spanish señoras, for their happiness, have kept the pagan content.

Much of what is characteristic of the home life of the Sevillians may be
gathered from the arrangement of their houses.  They are all—the houses
of the poor as well as those of the rich citizens—built around the
_patio_, or shaded court, where palms, myrtles, pomegranates, and
jasmines grow, and the singing of caged birds mingles with the sound of
the playing fountains.  Into this _patio_ all the windows of the house
open and the rooms lead.  The doors are of open ironwork—no two doors are
alike—and often, even in the small houses, the grating is of exquisite
workmanship.  One door, which also has an open _reja_, or grating, leads
into the street.  It is in these _patios_ that the Sevillians spend their
lives, and this throwing open of their homes to the gaze of all who pass
in the streets is exactly characteristic of this simple, happy people.
Every afternoon and evening the youth of the family laugh and sing and
dance to the rattle of the castanets.  It is against the _rejas_ that the
lovers stand at night and sing their serenades, and so persistent is
their patience that they have gained the title of “iron-eaters.”  All
Andalusians are musical; even the beggar thrums his guitar, which he will
not part with for bread; to him music is a necessity, and bread a luxury
with which he can dispense.

The Andalusian’s leisure is a perpetual source of delight.  What
impresses the serious foreigner, who is so fortunate as to become an
inmate of a Sevillian home, is the mirth and courtesy of the family, who
all seem to enjoy endless leisure.  Spanish households have a
pleasantness quite their own.  The men are never preoccupied with
business; smoking cigarettes, they will pass hours chattering to the
women of the family, who spend the greater part of the day working their
beautiful embroideries.  Few books are read, and talking is the chief
occupation.  No people can talk like the Spaniards, and the excitement is
so spontaneous that often the conversation is carried on far into the
night.  The slightest incident gains a poetic vividness from their
dramatic telling.  Cigarette-smoking and talking are the only indulgences
which the Sevillians carry to excess.

In their home life there is a love of visiting and a love of receiving
visitors.  _Tertulias_, or parties, are frequent.  But a Spanish party
differs materially from an English, in so far as there are no
refreshments—if we except the glasses of pure water and plate of
_azucarillos_ to sweeten the water, which are placed upon a side-table.
This is an instance of the sobriety of the Sevillians.  The guests dance
and sing and talk incessantly, and are perfectly satisfied to enjoy
themselves without eating.

The Spaniards are good hosts; the exquisite politeness which is natural
to them, even to those of the very lowest classes, causes them to lay
themselves out to entertain; boredom would seem to be unknown to the
native host and hostess.  They make a pleasure of the slightest social
intercourse.  I recall one occasion in Seville, when I asked permission
to enter the house of a poor woman in the Macarena quarter, in order that
my artist friend might make a drawing from her balcony of a building of
which a satisfactory view could not be obtained in the street.

“My house is yours, señoras; make whatsoever use of it you will,” was her
answer to my request.  And during the hours that my friend was at work
she put aside her occupations—she was a _planchadora_, and was ironing
with her assistants on our entrance—and gave herself up solely to help
and entertain us.  A _refresco_ was brought to us; _calientes_, the
twisted doughnuts which are made in every Andalusian house, were fried
for us.  Nor would she consent to receive the payment which we, with our
foreign stupidity, offered to her on our departure.  No, the kindly,
cheery woman did not understand payment for hospitality.

But it is during the days of festival at Easter and the _Feria_ that the
fine hospitality of the Sevillians is seen at its best.  The houses are
filled to overflowing, and hospitality is taxed to a degree that only the
most perfect courtesy and good-nature could endure.  Every corner is
received with a chorus of welcome, and embraced like a brother.  Beds are
surrendered, even sofas are given up, and as fresh strangers arrive,
unable to gain accommodation in the crowded inns, mattresses, pillows,
and rugs are brought out of cupboards, and beds are made upon the floor.
All the members of the family, and even the tired servants, who are
always joyously ready to help, sit up, because there is literally
_nowhere_ for them to sleep.  The difficulty of obtaining provisions in
these seasons of festivity is very great: the butcher cannot provide
meat; even bread is hard to buy.  But the señora of the house is never
troubled; she tells you her woes, and then goes smiling to fry
_calientes_ and prepare other delicacies for the refreshment of her
guests.  The constant Spanish courtesy never fails, and the foreigner who
happily chances among this crowded joyous party can but wonder.

CHAPTER V—COUNTRY LIFE IN SPAIN

To know Spain it is not enough to visit the towns.  It is when the
stranger leaves the beaten tracks of travel, and goes to the country
districts, where the outcome of modern progress is still unknown, that he
sees the life of ancient Spain almost unchanged.  I know of no experience
more necessary to the understanding of the country and its people than a
lengthened stay in a village _posada_.  The life, indeed, will be hard in
many ways, and it will be wise for the stranger to cultivate the stoicism
and indifference to personal comfort that characterize the Spaniards
themselves; but the experience is excellent, and the people you meet are
charming in their kindness and perfect courtesy.

The _posada_ is the _casa huéspedes_, or house of hospitality for the
neighbourhood.  The title is no misnomer, but stands for what the village
_posada_ truly is.  To stay there is to find a new meaning in the word
“hospitality”; it is to know willing service, restrained by the fine
Spanish courtesy from offensive attention.

It is more than probable that the first sight of the _posada_ may disturb
the stranger.  It is built with a spacious vestibule.  On one side of the
stone staircase, which gives entrance to the upstairs living-rooms, is a
dark wineshop, where the men of the village foregather to talk and drink
the black native wine; while the other side serves as the stable, in
which the mules, donkeys, oxen, and other animals belonging to the house,
have their home.  Many odours cling about the dark staircase; the scent
of closely packed animals mingles with that of garlic, while the air
reeks with the fumes of rancid _aceite_, or oil—the never-to-be-forgotten
smell that belongs to every _posada_.  The noise in the vestibule is
deafening and incessant; the men talk in loud voices which are piercingly
vibrant and metallic.  Cackling hens, with maybe a fat black pig or
little woolly lamb, block the way as one climbs the staircase to the
living-room.

This room is bare, but never dirty; the filth which I had been led to
expect from my experience of some of the smaller inns in the towns does
not exist in the village _posadas_.  The large windows open on to wooden
balconies which look out on to the tree-shaded _plaza_.  The walls are
freshly whitewashed, and the bare boards of the floor are scrubbed to
snowy whiteness by their daily scouring with sand; the curtains, too,
when there are any, are always white.  Sometimes a few highly coloured
and amazing religious prints in black frames hang upon the walls, but,
fortunately, more often they are bare.  The furniture is of the simplest
description—a large table, bare of any cloth, that fills most of the
room, wooden chairs and a Spanish press, a great cupboard which holds the
linen of the family.  The beds are placed in small alcoves which lead out
of the living-rooms; and these beds are always comfortable, with spotless
linen, embroidered, lace-trimmed, and brought from the lavender-scented
chest.  There is no fireplace in the living-room, and if, as often
chances in winter and early spring, the weather is cold, the only heat is
gained from the _brasero_, whose charcoal ashes give the very faintest
glow of warmth.  The Spaniards accept cold without murmur; they wrap
themselves in their cloaks, and wait till God sends out the sun.

The _posada_ is ruled by the señora.  She sways a rod of iron over her
husband, relatives, servants, guests, and the arrangements of the house,
being full of energy and the vigour of character that is common to
Spanish women even in old age.  She is the characteristic type of the
Spanish woman of the people, her face a formidable mass of wrinkles;
_jamona_, or stout in body, but of surprising agility; she is witty,
smiling, and contented.  From break of day until late evening she bustles
about, shouting orders as she goes from one task to another, yet she
seems never hurried, never overburdened.  How happy she is if her efforts
are appreciated and her guests enjoy the fare she has provided! how her
face saddens and clouds if any dish is sent from the table uneaten.
“Mas, mas!” (More, more!), is her constant cry as she enters the room at
the beginning of every course to urge her guests to eat.

To have English visitors staying at her posada filled the good señora
with pride.  Her satisfaction reached its zenith when letters arrived
from England.  She was loath to yield them up.  “The great English people
will know of my _posada_ now,” she said on one occasion, pointing to the
address in triumph.  With comical humility she asked that, in my
goodness, I would give her the envelope.  How well do I remember the joy
with which she carried away the torn trophy!

Nothing was too good for these strangers who had come from a foreign land
to stay at her _posada_.  The best of everything the house contained was
given up for our use, special food was cooked, and the village was
ransacked to provide things fitting for _los Ingléses_.  On one occasion,
when I had asked for a certain food not to be obtained in the
neighbourhood, a messenger was sent on horseback twenty miles over the
mountains to the nearest town to procure it.  Nor was any payment allowed
for the service.  No, the English señora was her guest; she had asked for
something, it was her duty to provide it.  The trouble! the expense! she
did not understand.  In the old Spain service is not rendered for
payment.

It is in the villages that one is best able to study the peasants and the
gipsies.  Sunday is the _dia festivo_, when the youths and maidens,
dressed in the picturesque native costumes, dance and sing to the music
of the village piper, who plays the _dulzaina_, a kind of clarionet.  He
marks the time by beating on a drum which is slung around his waist.  The
singing is the tuneless chanting heard so often in Spain, a kind of
interminable dwelling on one piercing note, not beautiful to unaccustomed
ears, but disturbing in its strange appeal, which so persistently recalls
the East.  The dances are danced by boys and girls and men and women
grouped in couples of four or six.  There is a great deal of movement;
the hands keep time with the feet, playing castanets hung with
bright-coloured ribbons.

In all parts of Spain there are gipsies, but it is in the districts of
the south that the stranger will see them best, for there would seem to
be a special affinity between the Andalusian and the gipsy character.
The Gitanas and Gitanos live in communities, often in houses carved out
of the mountain sides.  It is among them that we find the most typical of
the Spanish dancers.  Dancing is a universal accomplishment, a part of
life, in which every girl and boy takes his or her share.

The most important industries of Spain are wine-making and fruit-growing.
The country makes all the common wines for her own consumption, and the
brandies, rich wines, and fruits exported form a considerable source of
wealth.  Many thousands of men, women, and children, are employed in
these industries.  At Seville and other towns in the south, the women
pick the oranges ready to be taken to the ships.  Great heaps of golden
fruit line the groves, which are afterwards sorted, the better fruit
being wrapped in paper before it is packed.

One of the oldest industries is pottery.  The _jarro_, or earthen pots
used for water, are made of white or red clay, unglazed, and very
beautiful in shape.  The _jarro_ are sold by women in the markets of the
towns for a few reales—that is to say, about five or six English pence.

Spanish workers are universally poor, receiving wages so low that it is
surprising how they live.  But they are thrifty and sober, while their
needs are simple, and their hardships are mitigated in some measure by
the fact that almost all industries are carried on out of doors.  In the
streets of the towns you see men and women at work at the edge of
pavements, making and mending boots, working sewing-machines, preparing
leather goods, ironware, and other commodities.  The shops and small
manufactories are open to the street; you can see the occupants within
making ropes and baskets, saddlebags, brushes, and a variety of wares.
What impressed me was that these workers always looked happy.

Women play an important part in the life of workaday Spain, and the
splendid types of these women workers make the foreigner think deeply.
They are full of energy and vigour even in old age.  They work as well as
the men in the fields, turning the soil with forks, training the vines,
and garnering the grapes and chestnuts.  I have seen women carrying
immense burdens, unloading boats, acting as porters, removing household
furniture.  I saw one woman with a chest of drawers easily poised upon
her head; another, who was quite old, carried a bedstead.  A beautiful
woman porter in one village carried our heavy luggage, running with it on
bare feet, without sign of effort.  For what surprised me most was that,
in spite of hard physical labour, these women are beautiful.  They are
always happy and contented; in their faces, and especially in their eyes,
is that indescribable expression, the wonderful smile of Spanish women.

A visit to the _fábrica de tabacos_ at Seville will show the stranger a
charming scene of labour.  The rooms of the factory are large, and,
although low, are airy.  They open into outer courts, and the great
chambers, supported by pillars, resemble a church.  Each room has its
altar, which is decorated with flowers and offerings.  As the workers
pass they cross themselves, and never fail to make the customary
genuflection.  Yet, with the easy familiarity which is the special
feature of the Spaniard’s religion, they will often place their outer
garments upon the altar.  The _cigarreras_ are deeply religious, and at a
recent Easter festival one of the _pasos_ of the Virgin was presented
with a splendid new mantle at a cost of 9,000 dollars, for the purchase
of which the 7,000 workers had each contributed two _centimos_ a week
during the preceding year.

The _cigarreras_, in brightly coloured costumes, sit at work making
_polvo de Sevilla_ and _tabaco de fraile_.  A skilful worker can easily
accomplish ten _atados_, or bundles of fifty cigars, daily.  The murmur
of conversation never ceases; talking seems to aid the Spaniards in work.
Many of the women have their babies with them, whom they tend in the
intervals of work; children a little older play happily together in
groups.  It is enough to have seen these smiling, contented, industrious
women to know that life is happy to most women in Spain.

The _Kermesse_, which is held each year in the Esclava Gardens, is the
festival of the _cigarreras_; it is a kind of fair.  The stalls and
booths, where every variety of wares are sold, are presided over by the
_cigarreras_, dressed in the beautiful Andalusian attire.  They chaffer
over every sale, but they do not seek customers, and appear to be more
occupied in talking than in selling their goods.  All day long the
gardens are full of gay noise.  The women pass to and fro; some sit on
seats, some rest upon the grass under the trees.  In the centre of the
gardens a platform is erected, where in turn the women dance the
_sevillanas_ and other dances with charming spontaneous enjoyment.  The
sound of castanets and clapping of hands never ceases; the talking is
deafening.  Sometimes there is a quarrel, but this is rare.  There is a
natural refinement in these women, and because they are really happy they
have no need of riot to convince themselves that life is pleasant.

Their love of festivals is shared by all Spaniards, and everywhere
holiday-making is a part of life.  In the country districts, as in the
towns, the _Pascua de Resurrección_ of Easter is the most popular
festival, when the days are spent in a curious combination of religious
ceremonial and holiday-making.

It was my good fortune to spend one Easter in a mountain village, where I
had an opportunity of seeing the customs of the people of old Spain.  On
Palm Sunday the village was filled to overflowing with peasants, many of
whom had travelled long distances, riding on mules or driving in the
wooden ox-carts, from the hamlets among the mountains.  They were dressed
in the native costumes.  The men wore velvet breeches adorned with silver
buttons, and leather gaiters, open to show the calves; bright sashes of
red or yellow silk; jackets of brown cloth, with embroidered cuffs and
collars; blue or maroon cloaks, brightly lined; and pointed hats, adorned
with silver tassels.  The fantastic dress gave the scene an aspect more
African than European.  The women were not so gay, and were almost
universally attired in black; but the _mantilla_ with the white flower,
which all wore, gave them an incomparable grace.  All day the streets
were filled with bustle and life.  Vendors of palms were stationed in
every corner selling their wares, while boys ran to and fro among the
crowds with arms full of olive branches.

The great function was the procession, when the _pasos_ were carried
through the streets after the celebration of Mass.  In the _plaza_ a
stand had been erected, and every seat was filled; people crowded the
pavements, and in the balconies of every house men and women were closely
packed.  The gendarmes of the little town walked first, marching gravely,
the representatives of law and order; then followed the children, clad in
white, and bearing the consecrated palms and olive branches; while after
them came the priests, dressed in robes richly embroidered and trimmed
with lace.  Upon the shoulders of hidden bearers was carried the litter,
illuminated with hundreds of candles, upon which rested the figure of the
Virgin, the patron saint of the village.  The image was hideous, quite
without beauty, and decked out in cheap tawdry finery, strangely
incongruous.  But to the peasants she was the Mother of God.  I saw no
sign of levity; the attitude of the men as well as of the women was
perfectly dignified, perfectly religious.  All eyes were riveted upon the
sacred figure, heads were bared, and each man and woman bowed and made
the sign of the cross as the lighted litter passed.  Prayers were
murmured and blessings invoked.  “Holy Mother, cause the crops to ripen,”
“the sick child to be healed,” “the lover’s heart to soften”—such were
the cries of the women.  Children pressed forward, dodging unchecked
among the gendarmes and priests, clamouring for a blessing.  One small
_niña_ knelt upon the pavement in front of the _pasos_, holding up a
white carnation in offering.  A priest stepped forward, took the flower,
and placed it upon the litter.

To the children of the village the Easter days brought special enjoyment.
The part they played in the festival was a strange one, giving an example
of the old-world customs that live so persistently in Spain.  On the
_Viernes Santo_, or Good Friday, each boy and girl went to church armed
with a horn and large wooden clapper, upon which strange instruments they
played to frighten the spirit of the traitor Judas Iscariot, who betrayed
Señor Dios, the name by which they quaintly designate the Saviour.  They
blew and rattled with a will, and the hideous, deafening noise mingled
strangely with the music of the Mass, for the evil spirit must not
escape.  Incomprehensible survival of an old superstition, blending the
grotesque with the most sacred service of the Church—how often the
stranger is surprised in Spain!

The Spaniards are more friendly with one another than any people that I
know.  The stranger will realize this travelling in the third-class
trains, as he must in the country districts, where the expresses do not
stop.  These trains are known as _mixto_, and convey luggage as well as
passengers.  The carriages are uncomfortable, and not always clean, and
the speed is very slow.  Patience is a quality that the visitor to Spain
must cultivate.  The train may start before the advertised time; it may
be an hour late.  No Spaniard is disturbed by such trifles.  At the
stations there is always a crowd of people waiting.  There is a kind of
fatalistic patience in their appearance; they seem not so much to be
waiting for a particular train, as hoping that presently a train will
come that will take them to their destination.  Even when the train
arrives there is no hurrying; a start will not be made until everyone is
ready, for punctuality is a small virtue compared with politeness.  The
long-drawn cry of _A-agua fresco_! is always heard.  Much time is
occupied, as everyone in the train seems to want to drink.

In the carriages the company talk together with excessive volubility, and
have the appearance of being members of one family.  As soon as you enter
questions will be asked.  “Where are you going to?”  “Are you Francéses
or Ingléses?”  “Why have you come to visit their country?”  “Are you
married, and is the señor who is with you your husband?”  “How many
children have you?”  “How old are you?”  “Why do you wear a hat, and not
a _mantilla_?”  “And how is it you have no earrings and no fan?”  You
will soon become accustomed to this interrogation, which is made with no
hint of familiarity, and is the outcome of a friendliness that wishes to
make the stranger at home.

The natives seem to be without a thought of themselves, and incapable of
considering personal comfort.  They will crowd upon one seat of the
carriage to give the English strangers more room.  If the weather is
cold, they will insist upon giving you their cloaks.  They talk to you
incessantly, explaining to you the scenery and various places through
which the train passes, with delightful childish enthusiasm.  They will
offer you everything in their possession that you chance to admire.

I remember saying to a little Spanish maid, “What a beautiful carnation
in your hair!”  Off came the flower.  “It is at your disposal, señora.”
I protested with the fitting answer: “A thousand thanks, but, no, I could
not accept.”  But the offer was quite sincere, and, in spite of protest,
the flower was fastened into my hair, amidst the compliments and
congratulations of every occupant of the carriage.  On another journey a
fan and a beautiful peasant brooch, which I rashly admired, were pressed
upon me with the same delightful politeness.

When meal-time arrives, each peasant brings out the _alforja_, or
embroidered wallet, which Sancho Panza kept so well filled.  A huge
Spanish loaf is produced, and some of the long thin garlic sausages.
Slices of the bread are cut to serve as plates.  But before the meal is
begun a hearty _gusta_ invites all the other occupants to share in the
feast.  It is customary at this stage to refuse, and “Muchas gracias” is
politely murmured.  Soon the black-leather wine-bottle is brought out of
the wallet and a packet of some kind of sweetmeat.  Now is the time for
acceptance; the bottle is handed round for everyone to drink, and small
pieces of the sweetmeat are divided.  It is a charming experience,
provided that you have acquired the skill to drink from that curious
long-spouted bottle of leather.  And if you fail, the Spaniards will
enjoy the task of teaching you the art.

But, indeed, there is no limit to the helpful friendliness of these
simple happy people.  On one occasion a workman abandoned his own
journey, and, in spite of our protests, came with us.  When we arrived at
our destination, he spent several hours in assisting us to find suitable
lodgings in the village in which we had planned to stay, where there was
no regular house of hospitality.  He introduced us to the inhabitants of
the place as his friends, and expended much energy to insure our comfort.
It is only when work is profitable that the Spaniard is ever lazy.  He
delights to expend an immense amount of effort, which may not be
considered useful, so long as the work makes appeal to his Spanish love
of romantic effects.  It is because this trait is so often overlooked by
the stranger, who too quickly condemns “the lazy Spaniards,” that I
recount this characteristic incident.  Our friend was genuinely surprised
when we offered payment for his services; there was a note of dignified
sorrow in the “Muchas gracias” of his refusal.  It had been a privilege
to assist _los Ingléses_, whom he admired.  Had he not once visited our
country?  We were a great people.  He desired that we should think well
of his country.  All he would accept was to share our meal, after which
he left us—I suppose, to continue his own journey.

Among the mountains and in many country districts there are still no
railways.  The stranger who travels here has to use the diligences, which
on certain days in the week run from the nearest town to the outlying
hamlets.  The diligence is a kind of coach without springs.  I know of no
other conveyance so uncomfortable, except the long car of Ireland.  It is
drawn by a team of gaunt mules, usually six in number, with gay harness,
and each animal has jangling bells around its neck.  The driver wears a
picturesque dress: a brown jacket with coloured collar, a red sash and
knee-breeches, and a peaked hat adorned with tassels.  He drives with a
tremendous amount of noise, stamping his feet, shouting, and brandishing
his whip.  He beats incessantly the wretched mules.  The coach is kept at
full gallop, and ascends and descends the steep hills with a rapidity
which is often alarming; but accidents are rare, owing to the
sure-footedness of the mules.

It was when travelling in these mountainous districts that we gained some
knowledge of the wild animals of Spain.  We were often near to the haunts
of boars, wolves, and deer.  Bears are common in many hilly districts,
and that fine wild creature, the ibex, ranges the peaks of the higher
mountains.  Foxes are plentiful everywhere, and the wild-cat is far from
scarce.  The marten is often found, and otters live in most of the
rivers.

The swamps and ponds are filled with big green frogs, and lizards of the
same colour are common.  The frogs are much larger than the English frog,
and their peculiar cry, a sort of monotonous rumbling, is so loud that it
can be heard a mile away.  The legs of these green frogs are a table
delicacy much esteemed in many districts.

The peasants of Central and Southern Spain are the most
frugal people, who subsist on a diet that would be refused by the poorest
workers in England.  For the stranger the peasants do their utmost, but
the diet is limited to eggs, leathery, quite tasteless beef, hard stale
bread, and thin wine.  The cooking is always indifferent.  The first meal
of the day consists of a cup of chocolate or coffee, often without milk,
and a lump of dry bread.  There is no butter, and no milk except goat’s
milk, and, strange as it seems in this fertile land, vegetables and fruit
are always scarce in the country villages.  The universal dish is
_garbanzos_, a large dried pea, which is cooked with garlic as a flavour.

We spent several months fishing in these districts, and, although
sometimes we fared tolerably well, more often we had to be content with
indifferent and inadequate meals.  But for the sake of experience the
stranger can endure discomfort with fortitude.


CHAPTER VI—SPANISH ART

Again, the ironwork church
screens, notably those of the cathedrals of Seville, Granada, and Toledo,
cannot be surpassed.  In these works, with their dramatic conceptions,
finding expression in a wealth of interesting details, never without the
tendency to over-emphasis of statement which marks the art of this
people, the Spanish character speaks.  Æsthetic sensibility is almost
always absent; the art here is vigorous and romantic, frankly expressive,
with a kind of childlike, almost grotesque, naturalism that shows a
realistic grasp of all things, even of spiritual things.  I recall the
polychrome sculpture of this people; the images of the anguished Virgin,
in which sorrow is carried to its utmost limit of expression; the
bleeding heads of martyred saints, such, for instance, as those terrible
yet moving heads of the Baptist by Alonso Cano at Granada, or the
poignantly lifelike polychrome carvings of the Crucified Christ by
Montañes, Gregorio Hernandez, Juni Juanes, and other sculptors, which are
seen in many churches, and which are carried in procession in the Easter
_pasos_ at Seville and elsewhere, images in which all the details of the
Passion are emphasized with an emotional delight in the presentment of
pain.  And when I think of these images I understand the bull-fight.

And the seventeenth century witnessed in the art of the Spanish school
one of those surprising outbursts of successful life that meet us now and
again, in every department of enterprise, in this land of fascinating
contradictions, which give so strange a denial to the usual limit of her
attainment.  It was the century of Velazquez and Murillo, of Ribera and
Zurbaran.  In Velazquez, Spanish painting gained its crown of
achievement.

In the period after his great inspiration, imitation seemed inevitable to
his successors.  Spanish painting apparently was dead.  Yet it was just
in this time of degradation that the Spanish school was surprised
suddenly by the remarkable art of Goya.  Again a great personality filled
the Spanish art stage, forcing a reversal of judgment.  We forget the
usual level of the period’s achievement; we remember only Goya.  With
him, once more, we are face to face with a new force in art.  Spain
challenges the world again; and she gives it its most personal, its most
daring genius.

Such, in briefest outlines, is the history of Spanish painting.

It will be seen that Spain is not an art-lover’s paradise.  There has
never been a time when the accomplishment of the Spanish school is really
comparable to what the Italian and Flemish schools have achieved.  Spain
is not a land of great painters.  Murillo has sunk to the rank of a
second-rate master; Ribera and Zurbaran are yet hardly known outside
Spain.  El Greco, Velazquez, Goya—these are the only really great names;
and Velazquez towers as much above his fellow-artists as Cervantes above
his fellow-novelists.  Spain’s claim to the world’s attention in the
arts, as also in literature, rests upon the accomplishment of individuals
more than upon the general average of her work.  It is the result of that
personal quality—the predominance of character—which rules every
department of Spanish achievement.  It still lives in the vigorous and
characteristic Spanish painters of to-day—such, for instance, as Zuloaga,
Anglada-Camarasa, and Sorolla, artists who take high rank among European
painters.

It is often contended that Spanish paintings, if we except the works of
the masters El Greco, Velazquez, and Goya, are wanting in dignity,
wanting in beauty.  But are we not too apt to confine beauty to certain
forms of accepted expression?  Surely, any art that interprets life has
beauty; and no one can doubt, who knows the Spanish pictures, that life
was the inspiration of these painters.

The Spanish character speaks in every Spanish picture.  There is one
quality, which at a first knowledge will impress the careful observer, in
all these pictures, which, though different, all have one aim—it is their
dramatic seriousness.  Rarely do you meet with a picture in which the
idea of beauty, whether it be the beauty of colour or the beauty of form,
has stood first in the painter’s mind.  Almost in vain will you search
for any love of landscape, for any passage of beauty introduced for its
own sake.  Pictures of Passion scenes, of Assumptions, of martyrdoms and
saintly legends, were painted with a vivid belief in the reality of these
things, by men who felt the presence of the Divine life as a part of
human life.  To see these pictures in which homely details are introduced
into the most sacred themes is to understand the Spaniard’s easy
familiarity with his religion.

This is the reason why the Spanish painters always treat a vision as a
real scene, and why, too, they present religious and saintly characters
by Spanish models.  There is a Spanish picture by Zurbaran in the
National Gallery of London; it is entitled “St. Margaret.”  You look at
the picture; you see a Spanish lady, her face powdered, as was the
fashion; an embroidered saddle-bag hangs on one arm, in the other hand
she holds a rosary.  She is dressed in the picturesque Andalusian
costume.  I always smile when I look at this picture, it is so truly
Spanish.  The incongruity of clothing saintship in the garb of fashion
would not be evident to Spanish Zurbaran; he could not see a saint,
therefore he painted a woman, but in accordance with the custom of the
day he called her a “saint.”

All the Spanish pictures tell stories.  The successes of her painters are
due to this aim; their failures, to the sacrifice of beauty of ideal to
this—a danger from which, perhaps, no painter except Velazquez quite
escaped.  He alone, faultless in the balance of his exquisite vision, was
saved quite from this danger of overstatement.  It is the special gift of
the whole school, from the time of the early painters of Andalusia to the
time of Goya, to present a scene just as the painter supposed it might
have happened.  Was not their aim to translate life—the life of earth and
the truer life of heaven?  And to the Spaniard, we must remember, life
was always dramatic.

We find a sort of wild delight in martyrdom, as, for instance, in the
pictures of Ribera—a joy that is perfectly sincere in pain and in the
scourging of the body.  There are pictures horrible with the sense of
death and human corruption.  Again and again is enforced the Catholic
lesson of humility, expressing itself in acts of charity to the poor,
such as exists to-day in the custom of the washing of feet at the Easter
celebrations in Seville.  There is a childlike sincerity in these
pictures which compels us to accept and realize what the painter himself
believed in.

I recall the pictures of Zurbaran in the museum of Seville, pictures
which carry you into a world of realism, a world in which visions are
translated into the facts of life, set forth with a childlike simplicity
of statement.  Each picture is a scene from the life of old Spain.  What
honesty is here, what singular striving to record the truth!  (The word
“truth” is used in a restricted sense.  Zurbaran understood nothing of
the inner suggestiveness of art; to him art meant facts, not vision.)
The peasants in his religious scenes are almost startling in their
outward resemblance to life.  How simple is his rendering of the
Scriptural scenes, his conceptions of the Christ!  With what poignant
reality he depicts the Crucifixion, a subject exactly suited to his art!
His saints are all portraits, faces caught in a mirror, the types of old
Spain.  No one has painted saints as Zurbaran has done.  Before his
saints gained their sanctity they must have struggled as men; and as we
look at the cold, strong faces we come to know the spiritual instinct
that belongs to every true Spaniard.

Among the Spanish priests to-day, and especially in those living in the
country districts of Castile, the observant stranger will see the types
represented in Zurbaran’s pictures.  In the faces of these men, as,
indeed, in their whole appearance, there is a profound asceticism, a sort
of energy concentrated in a white heat of devotion.  I have never seen
the same type in Italy, or among the priests of any country.  But often
when watching a Spanish priest, in the services of the Church or walking
alone on the roads, I have felt that I understood the meaning of the
phrase, “This man has embraced religion.”

To all the Spanish painters art was serious—a matter of heaven, not of
earth.  Each painter was conscious of the presence of the Divine life,
giving seriousness as well as joy to earthly life.  It is this which
gives Spanish painting a special interest to the student of Spain.  In
their ever-present religious sense, in their adherence, almost brutal at
times, to facts, as well as in those interludes of sensuous sweetness
which now and again, as, for instance, in the facile and pleasing art of
Murillo, burst out so strangely like an exotic bloom, the Spanish
pictures reflect the temper of Spain.

No one can understand Spanish painting who does not know the Spanish
character.  I think, too, that nothing reveals to the stranger more truly
the Spanish character, which is at once so simple and yet so difficult,
in its apparent contradictions, to comprehend, as a knowledge of the art
of her painters.

