
CHAPTER IX. CORDOVA 

OF  all  the  sad  relics  of  departed  greatness, 
there  is  surely  none  sadder  than  Cordova, 
the  ancient  capital  of  the  Moorish  empire 
in  Spain.  Its  history  begins  in  152  B.C.,  when  it 
was  colonized  by  the  Romans,  though  even  before 
that  time  Cordova  had  been  a  place  of  consider- 
able importance.  The  town  remained  in  Roman 
and  Byzantine  hands  until  A.D.  571,  when  the 
Visigoths  captured  it.  The  Moors  took  Cordova 
in  the  eighth  century,  and  it  reached  its  zenith 
during  the  three  hundred  years  of  their  occupa- 
tion, becoming  not  only  one  of  the  wealthiest 
cities  in  Europe,  but  a  very  focus  point  of  all 
learning  and  culture.  Its  proud  motto 

"  Cordoba,  casa  de  guerra  gente, 
y  de  sabidurfa  clara  fuente  " 

(Cordova,  home  of  a  warlike  race,  and  the  clear 
fountain-head  of  learning)  was  no  idle  boast, 
though  the  words  should  be  written,  not  in  Spanish, 
but  in  Arabic.  The  reigning  Moorish  dynasty,  the 
Omayyads,  whose  capital  Cordova  was,  accumu- 
lated,  so  we  are  told  by  Gibbon,  a  library  of  no 
less  than  600,000  volumes  (an  immense  collection 
in  those  days),  while  throughout  their  kingdom 
over  seventy  public  libraries  were  scattered. 
To  the  schools  of  Cordova  students  flocked  from 
all  parts  of  Europe.  The  Arabs  had  made  them- 
selves masters  of  the  literature  of  Greece  long 
before  it  was  known  to  Europe,  and  from  their 
schools  in  Spain  the  teachings  of  Greek  writers 
were  disseminated  by  scholars  through  Italy, 
France  and  England  by  the  strange  medium  of 
Latin  translations  made  from  Arabic  translations 
of  the  originals.  Not  without  reason  might  Cor- 
dova claim  to  be  the  fountain-head  of  all  learning. 

But  the  Omayyads  were  not  content  to  rest 
here  :  they  desired  their  capital  to  be  a  religious 
centre  as  well,  and  at  Cordova  they  built  a  mosque 
with  the  daring  intention  of  rivalling  Mecca 
itself,  and  of  attracting  to  Cordova  the  stream  of 
the  Faithful  which  had  hitherto  set  from  the  West 
towards  the  holy  places  in  Arabia.  And  in  this 
they  partially  succeeded,  for  the  mosque  of  Cor- 
dova was  second  to  none  but  that  of  Mecca,  and 
in  point  of  size  it  still  remains  so,  though  it  is 
now  a  Christian  cathedral. 

On  the  overthrow  of  the  Omayyad  dynasty  in 
1031,  the  glory  of  Cordova  began  to  wane;  and 
its  sun  finally  set  when  the  city  was  captured  by 
the  Christians  in  1236,  and  the  vanquished  Moors 
fled  for  refuge  to  Granada. 

And  now,  of  all  this  erudition,  learning  and 
splendour,  the  only  vestiges  remaining  are  a  sadly 
defaced  mosque,  and  the  motto  quoted  above. 
Cordova  is  indeed,  as  Gautier  calls  it,  "  le  squel- 
lete  blan Al.  et  calcine  "  of  its  former  self.  Well 
might  we  repeat,  in  contemplating  this  fallen 
greatness,  "  Sic  transit  gloria  mundi !  ' 

The  sun  was  beating  down  fiercely  when  I  arose, 
after  some  three  hours  of  troubled  sleep,  and 
proceeded  to  hunt  out  a  thin  cotton  suit  that  had 
first  seen  the  light  in  Bombay.  Coffee  and 
a  cigarette  disposed  of,  my  first  thought  was  of 
the  mosque,  and  thither  I  wended  my  way  along 
a  narrow  street  bearing  the  pious  name  of  "Jesus 
Maria,"  which  led  from  my  hotel  to  the  Gate  of 
Pardon,  an  old  gateway,  Moorish  in  style  but 
Christian  in  origin,  giving  access  to  the  patio  of 
the  mosque.  I  was  glad  to  observe,  in  passing 
through  the  streets,  that  the  natives  of  the  place 
were  dressed  in  suits  almost  exactly  similar  to 
my  own,  and  that  my  appearance  in  tropical  gar- 
ments was  in  no  way  singular,  though  I  believe 
if  I  had  appeared  in  a  fur  cap  and  heavy  Russian 
shouba,  Spanish  politeness  would  not  have 
allowed  itself  to  observe  the  incongruity. 

Outside  the  Gate  of  Pardon  a  dark-skinned 
youth  accosted  me,  a  youth  who  only  needed  a 
fez  and  a  burnous  to  turn  him  into  a  typical 
Moor.  After  a  little  bargaining,  it  was  agreed 
that  for  two  pesetas  he  should  show  me  everything 
there  was  to  be  seen,  an  agreement  which  was 
faithfully  kept,  and  I  may  add  that,  when  the 
inevitable  picture  post-cards  were  produced  at  the 
finish,  I  managed  to  escape  with  a  single  peseta's 
worth.  My  guide  spoke  almost  faultless  French, 
though  he  insisted  on  calling  the  ceiling  "  le 
paflon"  ! 

The  mosque  stands  on  the  site  of  a  former 
Visigoth  Christian  church,  of  which  the  Moors 
became  possessed  partly  by  force  and  partly  by 
purchase.  It  was  begun  in  785,  by  the  first 
ruler  of  the  Omayyad  line,  Abderraman  I,  and 
its  characteristic  feature  is  the  multitude  of 
slender  columns,  which  support  delicate  arches 
of  the  horseshoe  shape,  so  familiar  to  every 
traveller  in  Spain.  These  columns  originally 
formed  twelve  aisles,  of  which  the  centre  one 
terminated  in  the  Mirab,  or  prayer-niche,  the 
:c  holy  of  holies  "  of  a  mosque,  and  the  culmina- 
ting point  of  all  decoration.  Abderraman  II, 
finding  the  mosque  inadequate  for  the  growing 
population  of  Cordova,  added  seven  more  aisles 
and  a  new  Mirab,  and  succeeding  rulers  made 
further  additions  to  the  building  and  its  decora- 
tion, one  of  them  erecting  fourteen  more  rows  of 
columns  and  a  third  Mirab.  And  before  the  build- 
ing was  considered  complete,  yet  another  seven 
rows  of  columns  were  added  ! 

Nineteen  gateways  gave  access  to  the  Court  of 
Ablutions,  where  took  place  those  ceremonial 
washings  that  play  such  an  important  part  in  the 
Mohammedan  religion.  This  court  was  planted 
with  orange-trees  in  parallel  rows,  which  were  so 
arranged  as  to  form  a  continuation  of  the  rows  of 
columns  inside  the  building.  The  whole  was  sur- 
rounded by  a  wall  with  twenty-two  richly  adorned 
gates.  And  Arab  writers  claimed  that  throughout 
all  Islam  there  was  no  mosque  in  point  of  size, 
workmanship,  construction  and  durability  equal 
to  that  of  Cordova ! 

But  alas !  when  St.  Ferdinand  captured  Cor- 
dova for  the  Christians,  this  mighty  pile  fell  upon 
evil  days.  Neglect,  decay,  earthquakes  and 
wanton  destruction  all  played  their  parts.  The 
first  Mirab  disappeared  completely,  and  parts  of 
the  second  went  too.  Chance,  more  than  anything 
else,  preserved  the  third.  And  the  needs  of 
Christian  worship  demanding  a  choir,  sixty-six  of 
the  beautiful  columns  were  ruthlessly  destroyed 
to  make  way  for  it.  Even  Charles  V  (himself 
a  vandal  who  pulled  down  half  the  Alhambra) 
could  not  restrain  his  indignation,  and  upbraided 
the  canons  with  having  "  destroyed  what  was 
unique  in  the  world  to  build  what  might  have  been 
built  by  anyone." 

Eight  hundred  and  sixty  now  remain  of  the 
original  twelve  hundred  columns.  Some  are  of 
marble,  others  of  jasper  and  other  materials,  and 
while  most  are  smooth,  some  are  twisted  into 
spirals.  Their  bases  are  mostly  hidden  in  the 
pavement,  which,  in  the  course  of  centuries,  has 
risen  a  foot.  On  one  of  the  columns  a  rude  repre- 
sentation of  the  Crucifixion  is  shown,  said  to  have 
been  scratched  by  the  finger  nails  of  a  Christian 
captive. 

The  third  Mirab  (Mirab  nuevo)  is  approached 
by  a  vestibule  of  extreme  beauty.  Arabesques 
and  mosaics  cover  its  walls,  the  dome  is  shaped 
like  a  pine-apple,  while  the  (delicate  tracery  of  its 
interlacing  arches  is  supported  by  marble  columns. 
The  actual  Mirab  is  a  little  recess  thirteen  feet 
in  diameter,  and  the  marble  pavement  is  worn  by 
former  pilgrims,  whose  custom  it  was  to  make  a 
sevenfold  circuit  of  the  walls  on  their  knees. 
The  roof  is  formed  of  a  single  block  of  white 
marble,  carved  to  resemble  a  shell. 

The  choir  which  aroused  the  wrath  of  Charles  V 
rises  through  the  roof  in  the  centre  of  the  build- 
ing. At  the  best  the  choirs  of  Spanish  cathedrals 
are  apt  to  produce  a  disagreeable  impression  (at 
least  until  one  has  grown  used  to  them),  but  here 
the  coro  is  an  intruder  whose  presence  is  intoler- 
able, though  intrinsically  the  work  is  said  to 
possess  considerable  merit.  The  side  chapels  are 
without  any  special  interest,  and  it  would  be  sur- 
prising if  they  were,  for  the  whole  atmosphere  of 
the  place  is  not  that  of  a  cathedral  but  of  a 
mosque,  making  it  difficult  to  realize  that  one  is 
in  a  Christian  place  of  worship. 

The  former  Court  of  Ablutions,  now  called  the 
Court  of  Oranges,  has  already  been  mentioned. 
Besides  the  orange-trees  (of  which  there  must  be 
fewer  now  than  formerly),  it  is  adorned  by  many 
stately  date  palms,  and  by  five  fountains  a 
thousand  years  old,  all  of  which  combine  to  make 
the  Patio  de  los  Naranjos  a  most  attractive  place 
in  which  to  linger.  I  was  taken  by  my  guide  to  the 
top  of  the  Campanile,  the  Bell  Tower,  which  rises 
to  a  height  of  300  feet  above  the  Gate  of  Pardon. 
An  old  woman,  who  acts  as  caretaker,  lives 
about  half-way  up  the  tower,  and  to  complete  the 
ascent  it  is  necessary  to  pass  through  her  kitchen. 
From  the  top  there  is  a  splendid  view  of  the 
surrounding  country,  the  sierras,  the  Guadal- 
quivir and  the  city  itself,  and  it  is  well  worth 
making  the  ascent,  which  is  far  less  tedious  than 
might  be  believed,  perhaps  owing  to  the  enforced 
visit  to  the  caretaker's  premises. 

Close  by  the  mosque  is  a  tall  pillar,  erected  to 
commemorate  the  appearance  to  a  Cordovan 
priest,  on  the  i/th  May  1578,  of  the  Archangel 
Raphael.  The  Archangel  swore,  in  quaint  but 
very  emphatic  Spanish,  to  protect  the  town  : 

"Yo  te  juro,  por  Jesu  Cristo  Cruzificado, 
que  soy  Rafael  angel,  a"  quien  Dios  tiene  puesto 
por  guarda  de  este  ciudad. '' 

(I  swear  to  thee,  by  Christ  upon  the  Cross, 
That  I  the  Angel  Raphael  am,  to  whom 
God  gave  power  to  protect  this  town.) 

Apart  from  its  mosque,  Cordova,  to  my  mind, 
is  well  worth  visiting  for  itself  alone,  in  spite 
of  its  being  "  a  blanched  and  calcined  skeleton." 
It  was  the  first  really  Moorish  town  I  had  seen  in 
Spain,  and,  as  "  it  never  rains  but  it  pours," 
Cordova  is  the  most  Moorish  town  in  all  Europe. 
Its  streets  are  so  winding,  and  so  narrow,  that 
any  ideas  one  may  have  formed  regarding  a  laby- 
rinth are  realized  here  at  once.  These  streets, 
which  are  merely  narrow  passages  between  the 
houses,  are  so  built  as  to  afford  the  maximum 
amount  of  protection  from  the  fierce  rays  of  the 
sun,  and  during  the  hottest  part  of  the  day  most  of 
them  are  shaded  by  mats,  or  awnings,  drawn  across 
from  one  house  to  another,  a  custom  which  adds 
still  further  to  the  Eastern  appearance  of  the 
place,  making  it  almost  difficult  to  believe  one  is 
in  a  European  city.  Of  the  older  streets,  few  are 
wide  enough  to  admit  of  two  vehicles  passing  each 
other,  and  it  is  customary,  therefore,  at  the 
beginning  of  each  street,  to  indicate  by  an  arrow 
whether  wheeled  traffic  may  proceed  up  or  down 
it.  There  are,  however,  few  carts  or  carriages 
in  Cordova,  most  of  the  traffic  being  confined  to 
mules,  and  these  usually  monopolize  the  narrow 
line  of  flagstones  doing  duty  as  a  pavement,  and 
drive  pedestrians  on  to  the  rough  cobble  stones 
of  the  road. 

No  sooner  had  I  entered  this  maze  than  I  was 
completely  lost,  for  all  ordinary  rules  of  locality 
fail  when  applied  to  Cordova.  Fortunately  the 
town  is  so  small  that  to  lose  one's  way  in  it  is  not 
a  serious  matter,  as,  sooner  or  later,  one  is  bound 
to  turn  up  either  outside  the  town,  or  on  the  -paseo 
beside  the  Guadalquivir,  and  from  there  a  fresh 
start  can  be  made.  But  I  soon  began  to  acquire 
an  instinctive  sense  of  direction,  and  before  I 
left  Cordova  I  was  able  to  make  my  way  from 
one  part  to  another  with  a  tolerable  certainty  of 
not  being  lost. 

During  the  course  of  my  wanderings  I  stumbled 
on  the  Corredera,  a  good-sized  square,  which  was 
used  for  bull  fights  and  tournaments  before  the 
days  of  the  modern  Plaza  de  Toros.  The  square, 
which  must  have  been  one  of  the  few  breathing 
places  in  this  city  of  winding  alleys,  is  now  almost 
completely  filled  by  a  huge  barn-like  building, 
which  serves  as  a  market.  I  looked  inside  this 
building,  but  was  obliged  to  beat  a  precipitate 
retreat,  so  truly  awful  was  the  smell  which  assailed 
my  nostrils.  To  the  tourist  in  Spain  who  is  at 
all  sensitive  on  the  score  of  smells,  or  who  is  the 
least  bit  inclined  to  be  squeamish  about  what  he 
eats,  I  would  say — Flee  the  market  as  you  would 
the  Evil  One ! 

Before  leaving  Cordova  I  crossed  the  Roman 
bridge  to  the  suburb  of  Campo  de  la  Verdad,  on 
the  other  side  of  the  Guadalquivir.  An  old  gate, 
which  now  serves  as  one  of  the  octroi  stations, 
and  was  erected  in  the  reign  of  Philip  II,  leads 
to  the  bridge.  It  was  so  hot  at  the  time  of  my 
visit,  that  I  wondered  whether  I  should  succeed 
in  crossing  the  bridge  without  a  sunstroke,  or  an 
attack  of  heat  apoplexy.  However,  I  managed 
to  reach  the  other  side,  and  from  there  had  a  view 
ok  the  town,  the  mosque  and  the  river  with  its 
Moorish  mills,  that  was  alone  worth  the  passage 
of  the  river  with  its  attendant  risks.  Nor  was 
Campo  de  la  Verdad  (Field  of  the  Truth — one 
would  like  to  know  how  it  got  that  name)  without 
interest,  though  it  seemed  to  be  inhabited  chiefly 
by  blacksmiths  and  artisans,  with  the  usual  con- 
comitant of  scraggy  fowls  and  frisky  pigs.  One 
thing  that  struck  me  as  remarkable  was  that  its 
very  humble  dwellings  were  all  electrically  lighted 
with  the  latest  type  of  metallic  filament  lamps ! 

On  the  following  day  I  left  Cordova  for  Seville, 
variously  described  as  "  the  oven  of  Spain  "  and 
;c  the  place  with  the  most  delightful  climate  in 
the  Peninsula,  if  not  in  Europe.55  At  a  quarter- 
past  ten  the  hotel  bus  lumbered  off  to  the  station 
to  catch  the  mixed  train  timed  to  leave  Cordova 
at  11.10.  While  waiting  for  the  train,  I  passed 
the  time  in  inspecting,  with  a  good  deal  of  interest, 
some  of  the  antique  rolling-stock  belonging  to  the 
railway.  The  second-class  carriages  appeared  to 
be  the  most  up-to-date,  while  the  first-class  looked 
as  though  they  might  have  done  duty  since  the 
introduction  of  railways  into  Spain.  Some  of  the 
latter  were  of  the  type  known  in  Spain  as  berlinas 
(they  once  existed  in  England,  and  were  called 
coupes],  and  in  these  the  end  compartments  had 
four  seats  only,  and  windows  in  the  front  as  well 
as  at  the  sides.  These  carriages  bore  the  pathetic 
inscription  Evitar  los  choques  (Shocks  to  be 
avoided). 

At  ten  minutes  to  eleven,  the  mixed  train,  en- 
veloped in  a  cloud  of  dust,  careered  into  Cordova 
station,  and,  the  few  passengers  embarking  having 
clambered  into  the  waggons,  quiet,  broken  only  by 
the  shrill  cries  of  the  water-sellers,  again  fell  upon 
the  scene.  Half-an-hour  later,  the  ringing  of 
bells  in  various  parts  of  the  station,  and  a  glimpse 
of  two  blue-bloused  mechanics  strolling  in  the 
direction  of  the  engine,  warned  us  that  the  train 
was  about  to  start,  and  this  it  presently  did,  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  behind  the  scheduled  time. 

After  leaving  Cordova,  the  line  crosses  a  barren 
country,  diversified  here  and  there  by  groves  of 
orange  and  olive  trees.  Prickly  pears,  which 
grow  here  in  great  abundance,  and  cactus,  and 
other  sub-tropical  plants,  give  the  country  an 
appearance  which  is  quite  un- European;  indeed, 
physically,  the  south  of  Spain  has  everything  in 
common  with  the  north  of  Africa. 

Seville  becomes  visible  from  a  distance 
of  about  eleven  miles  off.  I  looked  out 
eagerly  for  it,  curious  to  see  how  far  Theo- 
phile  Gautier  was  right  when  he  compared  its 
cathedral,  rising  above  the  other  buildings,  to 
"  un  elephant  debout  au  milieu  d'un  troupeau  de 
moutons  couches."  The  resemblance,  while  there 
may  be  some  justification  for  it,  is  not  one  which 
would  have  struck  me. 

Shortly  after  three,  the  mixed  train  drew  up 
in  Seville  station,  having  accomplished  the 
journey  of  eighty  miles  in  something  under  four 
hours. 

CHAPTER X. SEVILLE 

SEVILLE,  one  of  the  largest  towns  in 
Spain,  lies  on  the  river  Guadalquivir, 
about  sixty  miles  from  the  sea.  The  river 
is  deep  enough  to  permit  the  passage  of  sea- 
going steamers,  so  that,  as  well  as  being  an  inland 
town,  Seville  is  also  a  port.  Like  most  other 
places  in  this  part  of  Spain,  the  city  has  been 
successively  Roman,  Visigothic  and  Moorish 
before  finally  becoming  Christian,  a  conversion 
which  took  place  in  1248,  when  Seville  was 
captured  by  Ferdinand  of  Castile,  aided  by  the 
Sultan  of  Granada.  It  was  at  Seville  that 
Columbus  was  received  by  Ferdinand  and  Isa- 
bella— the  Catholic  Kings,  of  whom  one  hears  so 
much  here — when  he  returned  from  his  first 
voyage  in  1493,  and  this  led  to  the  monopoly  of 
the  American  trade  being  given  to  the  city,  which 
thus  became  the  chief  port  in  Spain. 

Modern  Seville  is  celebrated  chiefly  for  its 
oranges,  its  brilliant  Church  festivals,  and  its  gay 
outdoor  life.  So  proud  are  the  Spaniards  of  the 
city,  that  they  have  a  saying  Quien  no  ha  vista 
Sevilla,  no  ha  vista  maravilla  (Who  has  not  seen 
Seville,  has  not  seen  a  miracle).  Its  climate  in 
summer,  as  I  can  testify,  is  exceedingly  hot,  but  in 
winter  it  is  said  to  be  ideal,  and  frost  and  snow  are 
unknown.  Orange-trees  and  palms  grow  at  every 
turn,  and  white  is  the  prevailing  colour.  Moorish 
influence  is  conspicuous  in  the  city's  narrow, 
winding  streets,  many  of  which,  as  in  Cordova,  are 
closed  to  wheeled  traffic. 

I  had  been  recommended  by  a  Russian  friend 
to  go  to  the  Hotel  de  Paris,  but  the  man  from  the 
Inglaterra  was  first  in  the  field,  nor  had  I  any 
reason  to  regret  it.  The  hotel,  which  occupied 
the  whole  of  one  side  of  the  Plaza  de  San 
Fernando,  a  pleasant  palm-shaded  square  in  the 
centre  of  the  city,  was  really  a  model  of  all  that  a 
hotel  in  a  hot  climate  should  be.  There  were  no 
stuffy  hangings  or  carpets,  or  even  wall-paper  :  the 
floors  and  staircases  were  of  marble,  while  glazed 
Moorish  tiles  covered  the  walls.  And,  mirabile 
dictu,  English  was  spoken  at  the  Inglaterra.  For 
twelve  and  a  half  pesetas  a  day  I  was  lodged 
in  a  cool  and  lofty  room,  and  in  this  price  was 
included  a  first-class  table  and  wine. 

The  cathedral  is  Seville's  chief  lion,  so  I 
visited  it  first.  Not  only  is  it  the  largest  cathedral 
in  Spain,  but  it  comes  next  to  St.  Peter's,  Rome, 
in  size,  while  its  artistic  treasures  would  take  a 
place  among  the  leading  collections  of  Europe. 
The  building  was  begun  on  the  site  of  an  older 
one  in  1402,  and  the  chapter  determined  to  erect 
it  on  such  a  grandiose  scale  that  succeeding 

generations  should  deem  them  mad  for  having 
undertaken  it.  Falls  of  the  roof  have  been  the 
bane  of  the  cathedral,  due  either  to  the  madness 
of  the  chapter,  or  to  the  earthquakes  which  visit 
Seville  from  time  to  time.  The  last  collapse 
occurred  in  1888. 

My  first  visit  was  cut  short  by  guides,  who  are 
even  more  importunate  here  than  in  most  places, 
dogging  the  footsteps  of  the  visitor  everywhere 
until  he  is  driven  to  a  state  between  desperation 
and  despair — such,  at  least,  was  my  experience. 
So  I  left  the  cathedral  and  turned  towards  the 
river,  whose  waters  once  bore  the  caravels  of 
Columbus,  returning  triumphant  after  the  dis- 
coveries that  were  to  mean  so  much  to  Spain. 
The  way  to  the  river  takes  one  past  the  house  of 
Figaro,  the  immortal  Barber  of  Seville,  but  the 
possibilities  of  the  place  are  quite  wasted,  and  the 
house  is  now  a'  cosmopolitan  bar,  of  the  kind  that 
throws  out  a  special  appeal  to  sailors.  A  short 
walk  brought  me  to  the  quays,  but  they  proved  to 
be  unbearably  hot,  and  offered  little  in  the  way  of 
interest  beyond  a  curious  tower,  the  Torre  del 
Oro,  or  Tower  of  Gold,  once  used  by  Peter  the 
Cruel  as  a  prison  and  a  treasure-house,  but  now 
the  residence  of  the  harbour-master.  The  tower 
took  its  name  originally  from  the  colour  of  its 
tiles,  but,  beyond  the  name,  there  is  now  nothing 
golden  about  it. 

Baedeker,  in  his  happy  way,  says  that  in  Seville 
"  guides  are  unnecessary,  and  should  be  ignored." 
I  wonder  whether  anyone  has  ever  followed  out 
this  advice,  and  whether  the  author,  or  publisher, 
or  whoever  else  is  responsible,  really  believes  that 
it  can  be  followed  out?  For  my  own  part  I  am 
convinced  that  any  attempt  of  this  kind  would  be 
foredoomed  to  failure,  and  realizing  this,  I  volun- 
tarily submitted  myself,  on  the  day  following  my 
arrival,  to  a  guide  who  appeared  to  be  semi- 
officially attached  to  my  hotel,  but  whom  I  had, 
so  far,  successfully  repulsed.  He  was  a  dandified 
old  gentleman,  of  a  humorous  turn  of  mind,  and 
a  keen  eye  for  pesetas,  and  he  spoke  quite  intellig- 
ible French.  He  also  laid  claim  to  a  knowledge 
of  English,  but  resisted  all  my  efforts  to  put  it  to 
the  test.  This  obliging  person  agreed  to  show  me 
the  cathedral,  the  Alcazar,  the  House  of  Pontius 
Pilate  and  the  Charity,  with  sundry  side-shows 
thrown  in,  all  for  the  sum  of  five  pesetas,  which 
he  declared  was  "  tres  bon  marche."  I  agreed 
that  this  did  not  seem  excessive,  little  thinking  that 
it  did  not  include  fees  to  sacristans  and  others- 
fees  out  of  which  I  have  every  reason  to  think 
my  friend  reaped  a  handsome  profit — and  that  by 
the  time  the  round  was  over,  the  five  pesetas 
would  have  quintupled  itself.  In  dealing  with 
guides,  a  clear  understanding  should  always  be 
come  to  as  to  what  the  stipulated  fee  covers, 
though  even  this  is  not  always  an  effective  safe- 
guard against  extortion.  But  I  do  not  regret  this 
guide,  as  he  was  a  character  of  much  originality, 
and  his  droll  Spanish-French  remarks  went  a  long 
way  to  enliven  a  round  of  visits  that  might  other- 
wise have  become  tedious. 

It  was  on  a  hot  Saturday  afternoon  that  I 
started  out  with  this  paragon  to  do  the  sights  of 
Seville.  We  went  first  to  Pilate's  House,  which 
is  in  a  somewhat  remote  part  of  the  town,  and  is 
reached  through  a  maze  of  narrow  streets.  The 
building  dates  from  the  sixteenth  century,  and  is 
popularly  believed  to  be  a  replica  of  the  house  of 
Pontius  Pilate  in  Jerusalem,  though  the  belief 
seems  to  rest  on  no  firmer  foundations  than  the 
circumstance  that  the  builder,  a  duke  much 
renowned  for  his  piety,  once  made  a  journey  to 
the  Holy  Land.  The  house  has  a  fine  patio,  with 
a  fountain,  and  a  number  of  busts  and  statues. 
A  reproduction  is  shown  of  the  pillar  at  which  the 
scourging  of  Christ  took  place,  the  replica  being  a 
gift  from  Pope  Pius  V  to  the  builder  of  the  house. 
It  was  claimed  at  one  time  that  the  pillar  was  the 
original  one,  and  my  guide  had  the  effrontery  to 
revive  this  tale  for  my  benefit,  though  it  has  long 
since  fallen  into  discredit.  The  table  on  which 
the  thirty  pieces  of  silver  were  counted  is  also 
shown,  and  the  cock  (stuffed)  whose  crow  will 
echo  through  history  as  long  as  the  world 
lasts;  though,  as  Hare  points  out,  the  bird 
lived,  not  in  Pilate's  house,  but  in  the  house  of 
Caiaphas. 

In  the  square  outside  Pilate's  House  active 
preparations  were  being  made  for  a  fair,  and  my 
attention  was  attracted  by  a  huge  fish  "  with 
silvery  scales  "  balanced  at  some  height  above  the 
ground,  and  reached  by  a  roughly  made  ladder. 
It  was  explained  to  me  that  one  clambered  up  the 
ladder  and  entered  the  body  of  the  fish  through 
its  tail,  to  be  projected,  Jonah-like,  from  the 
mouth,  either  into  a  net,  or  into  a  tank  of  water 
which  stood  near.  I  was  sorry  not  to  have  seen 
this  ingenious  contrivance  in  operation. 

From  Pilate's  House,  we  passed  on  to  the 
Alcazar  (Al-kasr,  house  of  Caesar),  a  kind  of 
modernized  and  rejuvenated  Alhambra.  The 
present  structure  dates  from  the  time  of  Peter 
the  Cruel  (1353),  and  much  of  its  interest  centres 
in  its  associations  with  that  monarch.  Here  Peter 
trod  "  the  primrose  path  "  with  Maria  de  Padilla, 
while  rival  factions  tore  his  kingdom  with  dissen- 
sion, and  his  wife,  poor  soul,  cried  her  eyes  out 
at  Valladolid.  For  Maria  he  laid  out  the  wonder- 
ful gardens  with  their  fountains,  and  their  groves 
of  orange  and  lemon  trees,  and  for  her  he  con- 
structed the  subterranean  bath  which  we  were  to 
be  shown  presently. 

Seville  is  full  of  memories  of  Peter  the  Cruel, 
who  was  greatly  attached  to  the  city,  and  whose 
people  were  dutifully  indulgent  of  their  king's 
presence  among  them,  though  it  can  hardly  have 
been  an  unqualified  blessing.  Peter  was  a  des- 
potic sovereign,  in  whose  blood  there  must  have 
been  a  pronounced  African  strain,  and  the  stories 
told  of  him  recall  those  of  The  Arabian  Nights. 
The  most  popular  of  these  stories,  though  some- 
what threadbare  where  Seville  is  concerned,  may 
bear  repetition.  It  was  the  King's  habit  to  wander 
through  the  streets  of  Seville  at  night  in  disguise 
and  unattended,  in  order  that  he  might  become 
acquainted  at  first  hand  with  the  lives  and  manners 
of  his  people.  On  one  of  these  nocturnal  expedi- 
tions, he  became  involved  in  a  quarrel  with  a  man 
who  was  engaged  in  barring  a  small  thoroughfare, 
so  that  a  friend  might  serenade  uninterruptedly 
the  object  of  his  affections.  Peter,  drawing  his 
sword,  had  the  misfortune  to  kill  his  antagonist, 
whereupon,  fearing  justice,  he  took  to  his  heels, 
and  reached  the  Alcazar  in  safety.  But  though  he 
had  escaped  the  watch,  he  had  been  identified  by  an 
old  crone  who  heard  his  knees  crack  as  he  made 
off — a  peculiarity  of  the  royal  knees  well  known 
in  Seville.  Peter,  either  to  avert  suspicion  from 
himself,  or  to  maintain  a  reputation  for  justice, 
summoned  the  judge  next  day,  and  commanded 
him  to  produce  the  murderer,  on  pain  of  decapita- 
tion should  he  fail  to  do  so  within  a  given  time. 
In  the  meanwhile,  the  old  woman  carried  her 
secret  to  the  alcalde,  thereby  placing  that  worthy 
in  the  very  perplexing  position  of  having  either 
to  lose  his  head,  or,  what  would  seem  to  be  the 
same  thing,  denounce  the  King.  He  managed, 
however,  to  find  a  way  out  of  the  difficulty.  Mak- 
ing a  wooden  image  of  the  King,  marvellously 
life-like,  he  dragged  it  into  the  royal  presence,  and 
proclaimed  it  to  be  the  culprit.  The  ruse  was  a 
daring  one,  but  it  succeeded,  and  the  King,  highly 
amused,  so  the  story  runs,  ordered  the  decapita- 
tion of  the  image,  and  the  original,  or  a  replica,  is 
still  to  be  seen  in  the  street  of  the  Cabeza  del  Rey 
Don  Pedro  (Head  of  the  King  Don  Pedro),  set 
in  a  niche  above  the  spot  where  the  fight  took 
place.  Another  story  relates  how,  happening  to 
overhear  four  judges  quarrelling  over  the  division 
of  a  bribe  they  had  received,  the  King  had  their 
heads  cut  off,  and  used  them  to  decorate  his  bed- 
room. This  was  the  paragon  who  stands  towards 
Seville  as  Santa  Teresa  does  towards  Avila,  and 
the  Cid  towards  Burgos. 

Like  the  Alhambra,  the  Alcazar  consists  of  a 
patio  and  a  series  of  halls.  All  are  richly 
decorated  with  tiles  of  the  most  brilliant  colours, 
differing  in  this  respect  from  those  of  the 
Alhambra,  which,  mellowed  by  time,  possess 
a  metallic  lustre  that  has  so  far  defied  all 
efforts  at  imitation.  The  principal  halls  open  out 
of  the  Patio  de  las  Doncellas  (the  Court  of 
Maidens),  where  the  Moorish  sovereigns  are  said 
to  have  chosen  their  wives,  fifty  rich,  and  fifty 
poor,  from  the  maidens  of  Seville.  On  the  upper 
floor  is  the  bedroom  of  Peter  the  Cruel,  once 
adorned  with  the  skulls  of  the  four  judges;  and 
indeed  it  was  only  comparatively  recently  that 
these  trophies  were  removed.  The  Alcazar 
is  still  a  royal  residence,  but  it  must  be  a 
chilly  place  to  live  in,  except  in  the  warmest 
weather. 

The  gardens,  with  their  well  laid-out  paths,  and 
their  wealth  of  sub-tropical  vegetation,  are  strik- 
ingly beautiful.  They  contain  a  maze,  which  I 
was  not  shown,  and  one  or  two  paths  with  what 
are  called  "  surprise  waterworks/'  a  number  of 
tiny  holes,  which,  on  a  hidden  tap  being  turned, 
throw  up  jets  of  water,  and  thereby,  as  the  guide- 
book  says,  "  besprinkle  the  unwary  visitor," 
though  I  fancy  the  visitor  who  escaped  with  a 
besprinkling  only  might  esteem  himself  exceed- 
ingly lucky.  The  knowledge  of  these  waterworks 
made  me  exceedingly  cautious  of  the  Alhambra 
paths;  but,  though  I  was  shown  them,  no  be- 
sprinkling was  attempted.  Not  the  least  inter- 
esting sight  in  the  gardens  is  the  bath,  already 
mentioned,  constructed  by  Peter  for  Maria  de 
Padilla.  It  resembles  a  tunnel  of  considerable 
length,  and  is  very  shallow.  On  that  hot  after- 
noon the  "  bath  "  was  delightfully  cool  as  we 
walked  through  it,  but  except  in  the  very  hottest 
weather,  I  should  imagine  it  would  be  unbearably 
cold  for  bathing,  nor  is  it  clear  how  such  a  place 
could  be  effectively  warmed.  It  was  the  custom 
of  Peter  to  watch  the  nymph  through  a  hole  in 
the  roof,  and,  her  ablutions  over,  the  courtiers 
were  expected  to  show  their  appreciation  by 
drinking  the  water !  I  was  also  shown  an  ancient 
orange-tree,  said  to  have  been  planted  by  Peter 
himself,  from  which  I  was  given  a  small 
green  orange.  I  willingly  accepted  the  gift,  and 
with  it,  as  I  afterwards  discovered,  a  colony  of 
vicious  little  ants. 

The  Charity,  which  it  will  be  remembered  was 
included  in  the  five  pesetas,  proved  to  be  a 
hospital,  founded  by  one  Don  Miguel  de  Mariana, 
a  seventeenth-century  rake.  It  .is  related  that, 
returning  home  one  night  from  a  debauch,  he  met 
a  funeral  procession,  and  was  commanded  by  the 
bearers  to  follow  it.  This  he  did,  and  what  was 
his  horror,  on  arriving  at  the  church,  to  find  that 
the  body  was  his  own !  Next  morning  Don 
Miguel  was  found  senseless  on  the  spot  where  he 
had  listened  to  his  own  requiem.  This  gruesome 
adventure  changed  his  career,  and  from  thence- 
forth his  life  was  devoted  to  works  of  charity. 
At  his  death  he  endowed  this  hospital,  directing 
that  he  should  be  buried  at  the  door,  to  be 
trampled  on  of  all  who  passed.  His  bones,  in 
point  of  fact,  lie  under  the  high  altar  of  the 
church. 

The  hospital  is  managed  entirely  by  the  Sisters, 
and  it  was  one  of  these  who  showed  me  round, 
my  guide  remaining  deferentially  in  the  back- 
ground. The  church  contains  six  celebrated 
pictures  by  Murillo,  but  what  attracted  my  atten- 
tion most  were  two  extraordinary  pictures  by  a 
Cordovan  artist,  Leal,  representing  the  Triumph 
of  Death.  "  Leal,"  said  Murillo,  when  the  artist 
showed  him  these  masterpieces  of  repulsive 
realism,  "  you  make  me  hold  my  nose  !  ' 

Hard  by  the  Charity  is  the  great  cathedral,  and 
this  we  visited  last  of  all.  It  is  a  veritable  store- 
house of  artistic  treasures  in  wood  and  canvas, 
and  to  visit  them,  a  ticket,  price  five  pesetas,  must 
first  be  obtained  from  the  custodians.  This 
ticket,  which  my  guide  bought,  is  good  for  a 
complete  round  of  everything  there  is  to  be  seen, 
and  includes  an  official  guide,  who  is  told  off  to 
accompany  the  visitor.  My  own  guide  went  too, 
and  acted  as  interpreter  when  necessary. 

A  detailed  description  of  the  chapels  and  their 
contents  is  quite  unnecessary,  as  it  can  be 
found  in  any  guide-book,  but  I  cannot  omit 
to  mention  Murillo's  :(  Guardian  Angel." 
Another  picture  that  must  not  be  missed  is 
Murillo's  "  St.  Anthony's  Vision  of  the  Holy 
Child/'  a  real  masterpiece.  Unfortunately,  the 
picture  is  very  badly  lighted,  and  is  shown  with 
the  aid  of  a  candle  attached  to  the  end  of  a  long 
pole,  as  wretched  a  way  of  seeing  it  as  could 
possibly  be  devised.  It  represents  St.  Anthony 
kneeling  in  his  cell,  and  stretching  out  his  hands 
towards  the  Holy  Child,  who  is  seen  in  the  upper 
part  of  the  picture,  descending  from  a  cloud,  and 
surrounded  by  angelic  figures.  A  heavenly  light, 
which  emanates  from  behind  the  Child,  and 
throws  Him  into  strong,  but  luminous,  relief,  falls 
on  the  head  and  shoulders  of  the  saint,  and  partly 
lights  up  the  cell.  Through  an  open  doorway  the 
cloisters  can  be  seen,  but  the  bright  sunshine  in 
which  they  are  bathed  appears  pale  and  ghostly 
when  compared  with  the  miraculous  light  coming 
from  above.  In  1874  the  figure  of  St.  Anthony 
was  cut  out  of  the  picture,  and  carried  off,  but 
it  was  recovered  three  months  later,  in  New  York, 
and  has  been  very  cleverly  replaced. 

Peter  the  Cruel  and  Maria  de  Padilla  lie  in  the 
Capilla  Real.  Here,  too,  is  a  shrine  containing 
the  body  of  St.  Ferdinand,  King  of  Spain, 
and  an  image  of  the  Virgin  given  him  by 
St.  Louis  of  France.  The  royal  saint's  sword 
and  pennant,  and  an  ivory  statuette,  La  Virgen 
de  las  Batallas,  which  it  is  said  he  always 
carried   at   his   saddle   bow,   are   also   preserved 
here. 

A  very  conspicuous  object  in  the  cathedral  is 
the  tomb  of  Christopher  Columbus,  quite  a 
modern  piece  of  work,  which  takes  the  form  of  a 
coffin  borne  aloft  on  the  shoulders  of  four  bronze 
figures  representing  the  four  kingdoms  of  Castile, 
Aragon,  Leon  and  Navarre.  Whether  the  coffin 
really  contains  the  remains  of  the  great  navigator 
seems  open  to  some  doubt,  as  the  travels  of 
Columbus  by  no  means  ended  with  his  death, 
which  took  place  at  Valladolid.  His  body  was 
taken  first  to  Cartuja,  near  Seville,  and  from  there, 
in  accordance  with  his  last  wish,  to  Hayti.  On 
Hayti  being  captured  by  the  French,  the  remains 
were  transferred  to  Havana,  and  there  they 
rested  until  the  Spanish-American  War  in  1898, 
when  they  were  brought,  it  is  to  be  hoped  finally, 
to  Seville,  and  placed  in  this  gorgeous  resting- 
place,  whose  inscription  refers  to  the  defection  of 
:c  ungrateful  America  from  its  Mother,  Spain." 
Columbus  himself  has  not  enjoyed  uninterrupted 
popularity  in  Spain,  for  during  the  war — in  en- 
lightened Barcelona,  be  it  noted — his  statue  was 
saluted  with  a  shower  of  stones,  vegetables  and 
well-matured  eggs !  Ferdinand  Columbus,  son 
of  the  navigator,  also  rests  in  the  cathedral,  in 
a  tomb  with  the  inscription 

"A  Castilla  y  a  Leon, 
mundo  nuebo  die  Colon.'' 

Outside  the  cathedral  I  parted  with  my  guide, 
but  not  before  he  had  given  me  minute  directions 
as  to  how  to  reach  Tangier,  whither  he  had 
ascertained  I  was  bound. 

"  Vous  partirez  d'ici,  monsieur,  lundi,  pour 
Cadiz.  De  Cadiz  les  bateaux  vont  trois  fois  par 
semaine  a  Tanger,  les  lundis,  les  mercredis  et  les 
vendredis.  Vous,  monsieur,  vous  prendrez  celui 
de  mercredi,  qui  part  de  Cadiz  a  sept  heures  du 
matin,  pour  Tanger.  Si  le  mar  (la  mer)  est  bon, 
vous  arriverez  a  Tanger  a  midi.  Ah,  que  c'est 
joli,  ga,  que  c'est  superbe,  quand  le  mar  est  bon ! 
Mais  si  le  mar  est  mauvais,  mon  Dieu !  que  c'est 
terrible,  que  c'est  ter-r-rible,  monsieur!  Alors, 
au  lieu  d'arriver  a  midi,  vous  arriverez,  peut-etre, 
seulement  a  trois  heures,  meme  plus  tard !  Mon 
Dieu,  que  c'est  epouvantable  si  le  mar  n'est  pas 
bon ! 

"  A  Tanger,  vous  resterez  deux  jours,  parmi  les 
arabes.  Qu'ils  sont  voleurs,  qu'ils  sont  assassins, 
ces  arabes !  Us  volent,  ils  tuent — puis,  ils  cour- 
rent  dans  les  montagnes,  et  personne  ne  les  voit 
plus ! 

'  De  Tanger,  vous  prendrez  le  bateau  anglais 
jusqu'a  Gibraltar;  de  Gibraltar,  vous  irez  a 
Ronda,  en  changeant  a  Bobadilla  .  .  ."  and  so  on, 
in  fact  he  mapped  out  all  of  the  remainder  of  my 
route  for  me. 

The  next  day,  Sunday,  I  had  arranged  to 
witness  a  bull  fight,  but  as  this  was  not  timed  to 
begin  until  four  o'clock,  I  was  left  with  the  greater 
part  of  the  day  free,  and  I  devoted  this  to  an 
exploration  of  the  streets,  unhampered  by  the 
attentions  of  a  guide. 

The  principal  street  of  Seville  is  called 
"Serpents"  *  (Sierpes) — not  Serpents'  Street,  or 
The  Street  of  Serpents, but  just  "Serpents/5  It  is 
a  narrow  street,  to  which  only  pedestrians  are  ad- 
mitted, and  is  the  centre  of  the  outdoor  life  of 
Seville,  as  it  contains  the  chief  shops,  cafes  and 
clubs.  All  the  local  curios,  together  with  fans 
and  mantillas  in  great  variety,  iriay  be  had  here, 
but  the  Moorish  shops  of  which  Hare  speaks,  and 
in  which  customers  were  regaled  with  sweets  and 
dates  as  a  preliminary  to  purchasing,  have  dis- 
appeared. 

Another  favourite  promenading  place,  especi- 
ally at  night,  is  the  Plaza  de  San  Fernando,  of 
which  my  hotel  occupied  one  side,  and  the  Ayun- 
tamiento,  or  Town  Hall,  another.  In  the  even- 
ing, when  the  square  is  filled  with  a  laughing  and 
chattering  crowd,  in  which  dark-eyed  senoras,  with 
clicking  fans  and  black  mantillas  predominate, 
the  scene  is  a  very  animated  one,  and  the  tall  date 
palms  surrounding  the  square  lend  quite  an 
Oriental  touch  to  the  whole. 

Everywhere  in  Seville  one  sees  the  rebus 
device  of  El  Nodo,  granted  by  Alfonso  the  Wise 
to  the  city  as  a  reward  for  its  loyalty.  This 
device  consists  of  a  figure  shaped  like  an  8 
separating  the  two  syllables  no  and  do.  The 
8  is  meant  to  represent  a  skein  (in  Spanish 
madejd)  and  the  whole  is  intended  to  form 
the  sentence  No  me  ha  dejado  (It  has  not 

fl*  It  is  customary  in  Spain,  as  is  frequently  done  in  Russia  too, 
to  omit  the  word  "  street "  altogether. 

This  device  is  often  seen  in  other 
parts  of  Spain,  but  it  is  commonest,  as  it  should 
be,  in  Seville. 

A  familiar  type,  which  I  think  I  saw  here  for 
the  first  time,  is  the  seller  of  pea-nuts,  with  his 
little  ship,  generally  bearing  a  high-sounding 
name,  which  he  pushes  about  on  wheels.  The 
nuts  are  roasted  in  the  interior  of  the  vessel,  while 
the  smoke  issues  in  quite  a  realistic  fashion  from 
the  funnel.  There  are  also  water-sellers  galore, 
as  in  every  Spanish  town,  who  dispense  agua 
fresca  to  all  comers  at  five  centimos  a  glass,  but 
those  of  Seville,  and  indeed  of  the  south  gener- 
ally, struck  me  as  being  of  a  somewhat  ruffianly 
type,  while  their  cry  is  harsher  and  more  dis- 
cordant than  that  of  their  Castilian  colleagues. 

To  obtain  an  idea  of  the  extent  of  Seville, 
the  cathedral  tower,  the  Giralda,  must  be  as- 
cended. I  climbed  it  in  the  company  of  a  guide  : 
he  lurked  at  the  entrance,  and,  as  to  avoid  him 
was  impossible,  I  did  what  seemed  to  be  the  next 
best  thing,  and  bargained,  with  the  result  that  we 
fixed  upon  fivepence  as  being  a  fair  remunera- 
tion. It  transpired  subsequently  that  the  services 
of  a  guide  are  not  obligatory,  as  they  are  in  some 
places,  but,  possibly  with  a  view  to  discouraging 
suicides — I  can  think  of  no  other  reason — no  one 
may  ascend  alone.  The  Giralda  is  about  three 
hundred  feet  high,  but  the  ascent  is  the  easiest 
imaginable,  being  made  by  a  series  of  thirty-five 
inclined  planes.  As  is  inevitable,  some  adventur- 
ous person  once  rode  to  the  top  on  horseback. 

The  tower,  originally  Roman  or  Visigothic,  was 
in  Moorish  times  a  minaret.  The  present  upper 
part,  which  serves  as  a  belfry,  was  added  by  the 
chapter  in  1568,  and  its  four  sides  bear  the 
pious  and  appropriate  inscription :  Nomen 
Domini  Fortissimo,  Tunis.  Less  appropriate 
is  the  huge  bronze  figure  of  Faith  which  crowns 
the  dome  and  acts  as  a  weathercock,  twisting  and 
turning  with  every  breeze !  The  view  from  the 
top  of  the  Giralda  is  magnificent,  and  no  restric- 
tions are  placed  in  the  way  of  the  photographer. 

Easy  as  is  the  ascent  of  the  Giralda,  the  de- 
scent of  the  thirty-five  inclined  planes  is  even 
easier,  and  I  made  it  at  a  breathless  run,  which 
soon  brought  me  to  the  bottom.  Then,  having 
dismissed  the  guide  with  his  promised  reward, 
there  remained  nothing  but  to  return  to  the 
Inglaterra,  and  make  such  preparations  as  were 
necessary  for  the  spectacle  promised  for  the 
afternoon. 

CHAPTER XI. THE CORRIDA 

OF  all  the  sights  one  may  expect  to  see 
in  Spain,  none  is  so  typically  Spanish  as 
a  bull  fight,  and  it  would  be  a  serious 
omission  if  the  visitor  were  to  fail  to  see  one  of 
these  performances.  As  a  rule,  however,  the 
visitor  needs  no  pressing,  and,  whatever  may  be 
his  opinions  of  bull  fighting,  they  are  rarely 
strong  enough  to  keep  him  away  from  the  corrida 
when  the  day  comes  round.  If  a  census  could  be 
taken  of  the  foreigners  who,  from  motives  of 
principle,  have  refused  to  go  to  a  bull  fight  when 
the  opportunity  offered,  probably  the  number 
would  be  an  exceedingly  small  one.  Thus  does 
curiosity,  or  the  love  of  being  thrilled,  or  shocked, 
triumph  over  higher  feelings,  for  practically  all 
foreigners  are  unanimous  in  condemning  bull 
fighting  as  brutal  and  cowardly.  Having  seen 
a  bull  fight,  and  been  thoroughly  disgusted  with 
it,  I  am  on  the  side  of  those  who  condemn  it- 
provided  this  can  be  done  without  questioning 
the  right  of  the  Spaniard  to  amuse  himself  after 
his  own  fashion. 

Among  those  who  denounce  bull  fighting,  none  do 
so  more  loudly  than  our  own  countrymen ;  yet  their 
denunciations  are  not  without  some  taint  of  self- 
righteousness  and  priggishness.  For  the  Spaniard 
might  say,  with  a  good  deal  of  reason,  that  if  it 
is  cruel  and  brutal  to  allow  a  horse  to  be  gored 
to  death  by  a  bull,  it  is  hardly  less  so  to  stand 
by  and  watch  a  fox,  or  a  stag,  or  a  hare,  or  other 
animal  being  torn  to  pieces  by  hounds;  and  that  the 
first  lady  in  at  the  "  death  "  should  proudly  carry 
off  some  gory  relic  in  the  shape  of  a  "  brush  "  or 
a  "  slot  "  would  probably  astonish,  and  even 
shock,  the  senora.  In  defence  we  might  say  that 
hunting,  coursing  and  the  like  at  least  give  the 
animal  a  chance  of  escape — though  it  is  gener- 
ally a  very  small  one — and  so  have  about  them 
the  principal  element  of  a  sport,  whereas  in  bull 
fighting  this  element  is  entirely  wanting  :  the  bulls 
and  horses,  once  they  enter  the  ring,  are  doomed, 
and  nothing  short  of  some  great  upheaval  of 
nature  can  save  .them.  And  when  once  this  has 
been  said,  any  comparison  of  the  cruelty  of  some 
of  our  most  cherished  sports  and  of  that  of  the 
national  sport  of  Spain  becomes  one  of  degree 
only. 

We  read  that  bull  fighting  was  originally  in- 
stituted by  the  nobility  for  the  nobility,  in  order 
to  encourage  the  use  of  martial  weapons,  so  that 
its  motives,  in  the  beginning,  were  plausible  and 
even  praiseworthy.  None  but  knights,  in  those 
brave  days,  took  part  in  the  contests,  and  only  the 
best  horses  were  used — from  which  we  may  infer 
that  more  care  was  taken  of  them  than  is  taken 
of  the  sorry  hacks  that  find  their  way  into  the 
present-day  arena.  Being  knights  the  com- 
batants fought,  not  for  pecuniary  reward,  but  for 
the  love  of  some  lady,  or  for  bravado,  or  perhaps 
for  the  love  of  fighting  for  its  own  sake.  The 
fights  were  held  in  public  places,  usually  the 
Plaza  Mayor  of  the  town,  and,  as  may  be  believed, 
accidents  were  frequent.  This  led  to  the  erection 
of  Plazas  de  Toros  and  the  introduction  of  a 
class  of  men  who,  if  not  insensible  of  their 
ladies5  favours,  wrere  even  more  alive  to  the 
material  rewards  of  their  prowess.  But,  though 
bull  fighting  degenerated  from  the  sport  of 
knights  to  a  spectacle  conducted  by  paid  per- 
formers, it  in  no  way  fell  from  favour,  and  the 
successful  matador  has  always  been  the  petted 
darling  of  the  multitude.  The  income  of  a  popu- 
lar matador  runs  into  thousands  of  pounds,  but 
it  is  said  that,  as  a  class,  they  are  thriftless,  and 
rarely  become  wealthy. 

Bull  fights  are  held  on  Sunday  afternoons 
during  the  summer  and  autumn,  in  bull  rings 
devoted  exclusively  to  that  purpose.  The  ring, 
a  huge  sanded  arena,  is  surrounded  by  tiers  of 
stone  seats,  after  the  fashion  of  a  Roman  amphi- 
theatre, and  a  wooden  barrier,  about  five  feet 
high,  and  painted  red,  encloses  it.  Behind  this 
barrier,  and  separated  only  by  a  narrow  interval, 
is  a  second  and  higher  one,  to  obviate  any  chance 
of  accident  should  the  bull  leap  the  first  barrier, 
as  sometimes  happens. 

Narrow  shelters  for  the  fighters  are  placed  at 
intervals  round  the  first  barrier,  and  they  are  so 
constructed  that,  while  wide  enough  for  a  man 
to  pass  behind  them,  they  are  too  narrow  to  admit 
the  bull.  Attached  to  each  bull  ring  is  a  hospital 
for  the  wounded,  and  a  chapel  where  the  fighters 
receive  the  Sacrament  before  the  combat — for  the 
Church,  while  disapproving  of  bull  fighting,  has 
never  been  able  to  put  a  stop  to  it. 

Representatives  of  all  classes  are  to  be  found 
amongst  the  spectators,  nor  are  women  and  even 
quite  young  children  absent.  The  spectacle 
appeals  especially  to  the  humbler  classes,  and 
those  of  them  who,  by  hook  or  crook,  can  scrape 
together  sufficient  money  to  buy  a  ticket,  buy  one, 
while  those  who  cannot  crowd  round  the  gates, 
in  the  hope  that  some  chance  may  gain  them 
admission,  and  happy  even  to  be  within  earshot 
of  the  plaudits  of  the  crowd  inside. 

Of  the  fighters,  the  matador  es,  who  do  the 
killing,  are  the  aristocrats  of  their  profession ;  the 
banderillos  worry  the  bull  with  darts;  the  capea- 
dores  infuriate  him  by  waving  their  red  cloaks, 
and  the  mounted  picadores  engage  him  with 
lances.  Each  of  these,  beginning  with  the 
capeador,  and  ending  with  the  matador,  plays 
his  own  allotted  part,  and  all  are  attired  in  a 
picturesque,  old-fashioned  costume,  and  wear 
their  hair  in  a  short  pigtail.  In  addition  to  those 
already  mentioned,  there  are  also  the  attendants 
with  teams  of  mules  for  dragging  off  the  carcases 
of  the  dead  bulls  and  horses — a  performance 
which  is  accompanied  by  a  great  'deal  of  dash  and 
display.  The  weapons  used  are  barbed  darts, 
which  are  skilfully  planted  in  the  neck  and 
shoulders  of  the  bull  by  the  banderillos,  the  long 
lances  of  the  picadores,  and  the  sword  with  which 
the  bull  receives  the  coup  de  grace  from  the 
matador.  For  the  purpose  of  enlivening  "  cow- 
ardly "  bulls,  the  darts  are  sometimes  provided 
with  explosive  tips.  Probably  on  account  of  its 
chivalrous  origin,  every  act  of  the  performance 
is  attended  with  a  great  deal  of  ceremony,  and 
should  any  fighter  commit  a  breach  of  etiquette,  he 
is  reminded  of  it  by  the  public  pretty  sharply. 

The  bulls,  of  course,  are  specially  bred  for  the 
ring,  mostly  in  Andalusia,  and  their  careers,  from 
birth,  are  usually  watched  with  great  interest. 
For  some  hours  before  the  fight  they  are  kept  in 
the  dark,  and  as  they  pass  into  the  ring  they  are 
stabbed  in  the  back  with  a  goad  by  way  of  en- 
couragement. Once  in  the  arena,  the  bulls  never 
leave  it  alive  :  what  becomes  of  them  afterwards 
I  do  not  know  for  certain,  but  I  fancy  they  are 
put  to  "  charitable  uses."  As  for  the  horses  used 
in  the  fray,  they  are  the  sorriest  old  screws 
imaginable,  and  are  recruited  from  worn-out  cab 
and  tram  horses.  Their  career,  when  once  they 
have  entered  the  bull  ring,  is  short,  and  they 
usually  fall,  horribly  wounded,  at  the  very  start. 
Their  eyes  are  covered  with  a  black  bandage. 

A  scorching  wind,  described  in  the  papers  next 
day  as  a  :<  hurricane,"  added  to  the  discom- 
forts of  an  unusually  sultry  day,  as  I  made 
my  way  towards  the  Plaza  de  Toros,  camera  in 
pocket  and  fan  in  hand,  determined  to  see  the 
business  through,  come  what  might.  There  could 
be  no  question  of  not  finding  the  way  :  everyone 
was  proceeding  in  the  same  direction,  and  Seville 
was  in  a  buzz  of  excitement,  as  though  a  bull 
fight  were  the  rarest  sight  in  the  world  instead 
of  a  spectacle  that  might  be  seen  any  Sunday 
during  the  greater  part  of  the  year.  As  I  neared 
the  Plaza  de  Toros  the  excitement  increased  : 
sellers  of  fans,  of  agua  fresca,  of  hand- 
bills, of  newspapers,  of  pea-nuts,  of  paper 
cushions  filled  with  shavings  "  to  protect  the 
trousers  "  —all  these  did  a  roaring  trade  with  the 
eager  and  expectant  crowd  jostling  its  way  on- 
wards. I  soon  provided  myself  with  a  cushion 
and  a  handbill,  and  thus  equipped,  and  feeling 
very  self-conscious,  but  trying  not  to  appear  so, 
I  plunged  into  the  throng  round  the  entrance, 
grasping  a  magic  green  ticket  that  was  to  obtain 
admission  to  the  enchanted  circle.  The  arrange- 
ments for  dealing  with  the  crowd  were  admirable, 
and  a  system  of  numbered  entrances  enabled  the 
public  to  find  their  seats  with  the  minimum  amount 
of  trouble.  I  found  mine  directly;  it  was  in  the 
first  row,  next  the  barrier,  and  in  the  shade. 
Arrived  there,  I  seated  myself  nonchalantly  on 
the  paper  cushion,  but,  to  my  dismay,  it  burst 
audibly,  scattering  its  woody  contents  broadcast. 
In  view  of  this  contretemps,  I  decided  not  to 
assume  the  airs  of  an  old  hand,  and  instead  stared 
about  with  the  undisguised  curiosity  of  a  stranger. 

In  front  was  the  arena,  a  vast  sanded  space,  with 
a  hydrant  in  the  centre  from  which  the  attendants 
were  watering  the  sand — a  necessary  precaution, 
in  view  of  the  hurricane  raging  at  the  time.  The 
President's  box  (the  President  is  usually  a  local 
official)  occupied  the  centre  of  the  shady  side. 
Above  the  tiers  of  stone  seats  ran  a  colonnaded 
balcony,  which,  on  this  particular  afternoon, 
seemed  to  be  occupied  by  ladies  of  a  pronounced 
taste  in  hats  and  complexions. 

The  seats  were  now  filling  up  with  an  eager 
crowd,  who  made  no  attempt  to  restrain  their 
excitement  as  they  gesticulated  and  laughed  and 
greeted  one  another.  In  and  out  among  the  people 
hurried  the  water-sellers,  while  boys  with  paper 
cushions  still  contrived  to  find  purchasers  for  these 
articles,  in  spite  of  competition  from  the  Red  Cross 
officials,  who  were  hiring  out  horse-hair  cushions  at 
fifty  centimos  for  the  afternoon.  The  horse-hair 
cushions  are  ten  times  as  expensive  as  the  paper 
ones,  but  to  my  mind  they  are  worth  the  difference, 
and  are  undoubtedly  a  better  protection  for  the 
trousers. 

I  occupied  the  interval  still  to  elapse  with  a 
study  of  the  programme,  printed,  as  befitted  the 
occasion,  on  paper  of  a  lurid  red  colour.  It  set 
forth  that : 

'  With  official  permission,  presided  over  by  the 
Authorities,  and  if  the  weather  permits,  there 
will  take  place  on  Sunday,  the  loth  September, 
a  great  fight  of  six  splendid  Novillos  (young 
bulls).  The  bulls  that  will  fight  are  from  the 
well-known  farm  of  Sefior  Don  Jose  Anastasio 
Martin  of  Seville.  The  bulls  will  be  on  show  on 
the  eve  of  the  corrida,  in  the  Tablada  Meadow, 
in  order  that  connoisseurs  may  judge  of  their  in- 
comparable condition. 

Matador  es. — The  famous  and  extolled  fighter, 
Jose  Corzo  Corcito,  Andres  del  Campo  Domin- 
quin  and  Fernando  Resales  Rosalito,  of  Seville, 
Madrid  and  Castilleja  respectively,  who  will  fight 
in  turns. 

"The  Plaza  will  be  open  at  half-past  two,  and 
the  corrida  will  begin  at  4.30. 

"Note. — No  more  bulls  than  are  announced 
will  take  part,  and  in  no  circumstances  may 
a  greater  number  be  demanded.  Once  the  bull 
is  driven  into  the  ring,  the  public  has  no  further 
claim  if,  for  any  cause,  the  fight  should  not  take 
place.  If,  for  any  reason  for  which  the  manage- 
ment is  not  responsible,  there  should  be  no  fight, 
the  value  of  the  tickets  will  not  be  returned. 

"Important. — By  order  of  the  Authorities,  the 
public  are  informed  that,  in  view  of  accidents 
having  happened  through  this  cause,  any  spectator 
entering  the  ring  without  sufficient  reason  before 
the  death  of  the  last  bull,  will  be  punished  by  a 
fine  of  500  pesetas,  or  15  days'  arrest.  Fighters 
and  others  are  warned  that  it  is  their  duty  to  assist 
the  Authorities  to  preserve  this  regulation/' 

At  4.30,  the  arrival  of  the  President  and  his 
party  and  the  strains  of  a  military  band  put  an 
end  to  the  signs  of  impatience  which  the  public 
were  beginning  to  manifest.  Almost  immediately 
afterwards  the  doors  opposite  opened,  and  two 
officials  dressed  in  a  quaint  and  old-time  costume 
(I  found  out  afterwards  that  they  were  police)  rode 
into  the  arena  and  saluted  the  very  commonplace- 
looking  persons  in  the  presidential  box.  They 
were  followed  almost  immediately  by  a  glitter- 
ing procession  of  fighters,  all  of  them  on  foot, 
except  two  picadores  on  their  wretched  horses. 
The  key  of  the  Toril  was  thrown  down  by  the 
President,  as  a  signal  that  the  proceedings  were 
to  start,  and  after  a  short  interval  a  great  black 
Bull,  already  bleeding  from  a  wound  in  his  side, 
bounded  into  the  ring,  and  at  once  gave  chase  to 
the  brightly  attired  capeadores.  These  waved 
their  red  capes  in  front  of  the  bull,  allowing  him 
to  rip  the  garments  up  with  his  murderous  horns, 
and  then  ran  quickly  off,  and  got  behind  the 
shelters  in  the  barrier.  This  went  on  for  some 
minutes,  until,  all  the  capes  having  been  torn  to 
ribbons,  the  performance  of  the  capeadores  was 
brought  to  a  close,  and  the  mounted  picador  took 
his  turn.  This  introduced  quite  another  element 
into  a  performance  which,  so  far,  had  been  amus- 
ing, if  rather  silly.  The  picador  allowed  the  bull 
to  charge  him,  and,  with  his  lance,  prodded  the 
brute  in  the  neck.  The  infuriated  bull  vented 
all  his  rage  on  the  horse,  and  what  followed  was 
very  horrible,  and  need  not  be  described  in  detail. 
The  horse  rolled  over,  without  a  sound  or  cry  of 
pain,  fortunately — it  was  the  one  thing  that  might 
have  added  to  the  horror.  A  dreadful  attempt 
was  made,  by  prodding  the  expiring  animal  with 
a  lance,  to  get  him  to  rise  and  continue  the 
struggle;  but  this  was  useless,  and  the  poor 
creature  was  killed  by  a  spike  driven  into  its  brain 
— the  only  humane  act  I  had  seen  so  far.  They  say 
that  the  wounds  of  the  horses  are  sometimes  filled 
with  tow  and  roughly  stitched  up,  in  order  that 
they  may  be  made  to  hold  out  a  little  longer— 
but  we  were  spared  that  refinement  of  cruelty. 
In  the  meantime,  the  picador  having  been  pro- 
vided with  a  second  horse,  the  same  abominable 
performance  was  being  re-enacted  on  the  other 
side  of  the  ring — but  I  kept  my  eyes  away  from 
this  until  it  was  over. 

The  worst  part  of  the  fight — the  killing  of  the 
horses — was  now  over,  and  the  banderilleros  took 
their  turn.  It  is  the  agreeable  duty  of  these  gentry 
to  torture  the  bull  still  further  by  throwing  gaily 
coloured  darts  at  him,  which  stick,  and  make  him 
very  savage.  The  performance  demands  a  good 
deal  of  skill  and  address,  and,  by  comparison  with 
what  had  gone  before,  it  seemed  quite  gentle 
and  humane.  The  banderillero  stands  in  front 
of  the  bull,  waving  his  darts,  holding  one  in  each 
hand.  When  the  bull  charges,  both  darts  are 
thrown  at  once,  while  the  man  jumps  lightly  to 
one  side.  If  it  has  been  done  properly,  the  darts 
fasten  themselves  one  in  each  side  of  the  bull's 
neck,  and  remain  where  they  strike,  the  animal's 
efforts  to  shake  them  off  being  generally  quite 
unavailing.  Several  darts  were  planted  in  this 
fashion,  the  bull  careering  madly  about  in  a  vain 
endeavour  to  get  rid  of  them. 

In  the  final  act  of  this  blood-stained  tragedy, 
the  leading  performer  dies  by  the  sword,  amidst 
the  groans  or  the  plaudits  of  the  multitude.  If 
he  has  been  a  "  brave  "  bull,  then  he  is  cheered, 
but  if  he  has  been  "  cowardly  "  he  is  hooted,  and 
called  a  cow.  But  brave  or  cowardly,  he  dies 
just  the  same;  there  is  no  mercy  for  him.  Permis- 
sion is  first  asked  of  the  President  to  kill  the  bull, 
and,  when  this  has  been  obtained,  his  death  is  dedi- 
cated to  the  President  himself,  or  perhaps  to  the 
town.  The  killing  is  done  by  the  matador,  armed 
with  a  sword  and  a  red  cloak.  With  a  few  passes 
of  the  cloak,  the  matador  gets  the  bull  into  the  re- 
quired position  and  allows  it  to  charge  him.  He 
receives  the  charge  on  the  point  of  his  sword,  and 
if  the  stroke  has  been  skilfully  made,  the  bull 
drops  dead,  while  the  man  springs  lightly  aside. 
The  feat  is  not  unattended  with  danger,  and  it 
does  not  always  succeed  at  the  first  attempt.  It 
did  not  on  this  occasion,  though  the  sword  was 
plunged  up  to  the  hilt,  and  left  there.  But  a 
second  sword  was  immediately  forthcoming; 
after  a  little  further  play  it  went  home;  and  the 
bull  dropped  on  the  sand,  his  troubles  in  this  life 
over.  Teams  of  gaily  decked  mules,  their  har- 
ness covered  with  jingling  bells,  now  dashed  into 
the  ring,  and  in  a  moment  the  dead  bodies  of  the 
bull  and  horses  were  whisked  off,  while  the  atten- 
dants raked  over  the  blood-stains,  and  the  ring  was 
made  ready  for  the  next  bull.  But  I  had  seen  all 
I  wanted,  and  left,  thoroughly  nauseated,  twenty- 
five  minutes  after  the  start  of  the  performance. 

I  have  been  told  by  an  Englishman  resident  in 
Spain  that  one  soon  grows  accustomed  to  bull 
fights,  and  even  acquires  a  taste  for  them  in  time. 
For  my  own  part,  as  I  left  the  Plaza  de  Toros, 
I  felt  that  nothing  would  persuade  me  ever  to 
see  such  a  performance  again. 

CHAPTER XII. CADIZ 

MY  last  night  at  the  Inglaterra  was 
enlivened  by  a  thunderstorm  of  quite 
exceptional  violence,  by  the  barking  of 
a  dog  in  the  adjoining  apartment,  and  by  the 
attentions  of  two  or  three  mosquitoes,  which  got 
under  the  mosquito  net,  and  had  the  time  of  their 
lives,  though  they  paid  for  it  in  the  morning. 
Toreadores  and  matadores  also  played  grotesque 
parts  in  my  dreams,  with  the  result  that  I  was  in 
a  somewhat  jaded  condition  when  the  dirty  and 
jolting  old  rapido  puffed  out  of  Seville  station 
on  its  way  to  Cadiz. 

Being  alone  in  the  compartment,  I  gave  myself 
up  to  the  study  of  Baedeker  and  the  passing 
scenery.  A  careful  watch  was  kept  for  the  river 
Guadaira,  which  the  railway  crosses,  but  the  river 
had  gone  the  way  of  most  other  Spanish  water- 
courses at  that  time  of  the  year,  and  I  failed  to 
discern  it.  The  country  here  is  described  as  "  a 
fertile  district,  with  plantations  of  oranges,  olives 
and  pomegranates  "  —a  description  which  seemed 
to  be  more  picturesque  than  truthful,  the  scenery 
consisting,  for  the  most  part,  of  a  tawny,  dusty 
plain,  whose  tropical  vegetation — palms,  cacti, 
and  the  like — gave  it  an  appearance  that  was 
distinctly  un-European. 

Utrera  was  the  first  station  :  it  is  nineteen  miles 
from  Seville,  and  it  took  the  rapido  nearly  an 
hour  to  cover  the  distance.  Utrera  is  a  small 
town,  now  engaged  in  peaceful  pursuits,  but  in 
the  Middle  Ages  things  were  otherwise,  and  the 
town  was  famed  as  a  resort  for  fugitives  from 
justice.  To  such  an  extent  did  it  live  up  to  its 
reputation,  that  "  Kill  the  King  and  fly  to 
Utrera  "  became  a  byword.  Beyond  Utrera  we 
crossed  extensive  saline  plains  (marismas\  which 
are  used  as  pasture  for  the  "  brave  bulls  "  of  the 
arena — though  there  appeared  to  be  little  in  the 
way  of  pasturage  in  that  sun-baked  land.  But 
I  noted  great  herds  of  the  bulls,  taking  life  very 
calmly,  and  happily  ignorant  of  the  reward  that 
awaited  their  bravery.  These  desolate  plains 
stretched  far  away  to  the  horizon,  where  the 
sierras,  dim  and  mysterious,  rose  to  the  sky. 

In  due  course  we  reached  Jerez  (or  Xeres),  the 
place  from  which  sherry  takes  its  name.  Bottles 
of  the  wine  were  being  offered  for  sale  at  the 
station  by  boys,  but  they  appeared  to  find  no  pur- 
chasers. The  guide-book's  description  of  Jerez 
made  me  wish  I  was  stopping  there  :  millions  of 
gallons  of  wine  are  said  to  be  stored  in  the  vaults 
of  the  town,  and  visitors  to  the  bodegas  are  not 
only  shown  casks  named  after  Methuselah,  the 
apostles  and  others,  but  are  invited  to  taste  of 
their  generous  contents — a  privilege  Baedeker 
wisely  recommends  should  be  exercised  with  dis- 
cretion, lest,  on  returning  to  the  outer  air,  the 
results  of  much  tasting  be  inconvenient.  An 
excursion  may  be  made  from  Jerez  across  the 
mountains  to  Ronda,  and  this  is  recommended  to 
"  those  who  are  fond  of  adventurous  mountain 
tours."  So  I  left  Jerez  with  regret — a  regret  that 
the  time  afterwards  idled  away  in  Cadiz  in  no  way 
diminished. 

Soon  after  leaving  Jerez,  we  had  our  first  view 
of  Cadiz,  rising  from  the  sea,  on  the  far  side  of 
the  lagoon  on  which  it  is  built.  The  line  makes 
a  huge  sweep  round  this  lagoon,  crossing  dismal 
salt  marshes,  intersected  by  canals.  I  was  puzzled 
by  what  appeared  to  be  large  pyramidal  tents, 
of  the  purest  white,  dotted  all  over  this  dreary 
country,  and  suggesting  an  invading  army.  On 
consulting  the  guide-book,  it  was  found  that  these 
were  pyramids  of  salt,  obtained  by  the  evaporation 
of  the  sea-water. 

Cadiz  is  built  at  the  end  of  a  narrow  strip  of 
land,  five  miles  in  length,  and  a  few  hundred 
yards  in  breadth.  We  reached  it  at  one  o'clock, 
and  I  at  once  fell  a  victim  to  the  interpreter  from 
the  Grand  Hotel  de  France  etde  Paris.  The  octroi 
officials  here,  for  some  reason  or  other,  were  exceed- 
ingly strict,  but  by  the  exercise  of  a  little  patience 
I  got  through  without  trouble,  and  was  soon  being 
rattled  off  through  the  clean  and  well-paved 
streets  of  the  town. 

Cadiz  is  one  of  the  few  places  about  which 
Theophile  Gautier  has  left  no  illuminating  remark 
on  record.  And,  to  tell  the  truth,  there  is  little  to 
say  about  Cadiz,  and  little  there  that  cannot  be  seen 
to  greater  advantage  in  other  Spanish  towns.  It 
is  a  clean  and  pleasant  little  place,  but,  before  all, 
it  is  a  port,  and  there  is  a  similarity  about  seaports 
all  the  world  over.  Such,  at  least,  was  the  im- 
pression produced  on  my  mind.  But  I  do  not 
wish  to  disparage  Cadiz.  It  is  one  of  the  cleanest 
towns  I  visited  in  Spain,  and  it  must  surely  be  one 
of  the  most  orderly,  if  the  sereno,  with  his  staff 
and  lantern,  stands  for  law  and  order.  In  no  other 
place  did  I  see  so  many  serenos — one  met  them 
after  nightfall  everywhere,  flitting  about  like  so 
many  gigantic  fireflies. 

Most  of  Cadiz  strikes  one  as  being  quite 
modern,  an  impression  heightened  by  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  principal  streets,  which  are  laid  out 
at  right  angles  to  each  other.  It  is  a  city  of  high 
buildings,  as  its  situation  at  the  end  of  a  narrow 
promontory  prevents  its  expanding  in  any  other 
than  an  upward  direction.  The  oldest  streets  are  to 
be  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  cathedral, 
and  to  these  streets  my  remarks  about  cleanliness 
have  no  application,  while  the  smells  in  this  quarter 
would  vie  with  those  of  any  other  town  in  Europe 
for  strength  and  variety.  Here,  hidden  away  in 
a  maze  of  narrow  alleys,  is  the  market,  where 
anything  in  the  way  of  fruit  or  vegetables  may 
be  bought,  from  a  lemon  to  a  monstrous  pumpkin. 
The  atmosphere  of  the  market  is  very  fully 
flavoured,  and  the  conditions  generally  are  sug- 
gestive  of  anything  but  cleanliness  and  hygiene; 
but,  for  all  that,  a  visit  to  it  should  not  be 
omitted. 

It  was  very  hot  during  my  stay  :  not  the  dry, 
oven-like  heat  of  the  interior,  but  a  moist,  green- 
house warmth,  suggesting  the  tropics — a  suggestion 
heightened  by  the  palms  which  grew  everywhere 
in  great  abundance.  Thinking  to  escape  the  heat, 
I  sought  the  Parque  de  Genoves,  a  delightfully 
shady  spot  facing  the  sea,  and  planted  with  palm- 
trees.  But  the  sea-breeze  promised  by  Baedeker 
was  not  blowing,  and,  still  wandering  on  in  search 
of  it,  I  presently  reached  the  cathedral,  built,  as 
is  only  right  in  a  town  like  Cadiz,  on  the  very 
edge  of  the  sea.  There  is  little  of  note  to  be 
found  there,  but  it  was  cool  and  pleasant  in  the 
dim  interior,  and  I  lingered  for  some  time, 
with  no  other  company  than  a  sleepy  yellow  cat 
and  the  Chapter,  chanting  their  Office  somewhere 
within  the  seclusion  of  the  coro. 

One  can  easily  walk  right  round  Cadiz  in  an 
hour,  and  when  one  has  done  this,  and  visited  the 
harbour,  the  market-place,  and  the  cathedral, 
the  attractions  of  the  town  are  pretty  well 
exhausted.  So  I  cast  about  on  the  following  day 
for  an  excursion  which  would  take  me  farther 
afield.  The  one  most  recommended  is  a  trip  in 
the  local  steamer  to  Puerto  Santa  Maria,  some 
seven  miles  across  the  bay;  but  the  service  is  run 
at  such  inconvenient  intervals,  that  in  the  end  I 
fell  back  on  a  tram  ride  to  San  Fernando,  a 
town  fifteen  miles  away,  on  the  mainland.  It  is 
rather  a  tedious  ride  of  one  and  a  quarter  hours, 
and  when,  at  length,  the  tram  reached  its  destina- 
tion, I  found  that  we  had  passed  San  Fernando 
and  arrived  at  La  Carraca,  a  place  whose  doubtful 
attractions  consist  principally  of  a  naval  dock- 
yard and  an  endless  array  of  shallow  pools,  in 
which  the  salt  pyramids  I  had  observed  from  the 
railway  have  their  origin. 

But  the  excursion  was  not  altogether  profitless, 
as,  on  the  way  home,  alighting  from  the  tram  just 
before  reaching  Cadiz,  I  came  upon  some  fine 
old  sea-walls,  so  much  eaten  away  by  the  sea 
that  they  had  the  appearance  of  natural  cliffs. 
One  may  well  believe  that  substantial  defences 
against  the  sea  are  necessary  in  such  a  place  as 
Cadiz,  which  is  exposed  to  the  full  force  of  every 
wind  that  blows  from  the  Atlantic.  Without  some 
protection  the  Peninsula  would  soon  become  an 
island,  if  it  did  not  disappear  altogether  beneath 
the  waves.  On  the  land  side,  the  town  is  defended 
by  imposing  walls  and  fortifications,  and  a  deep 
moat  crossed  by  drawbridges.  The  works,  how- 
ever, are  quite  modern. 

I  was  to  leave  Spain  on  the  following  day  for  a 
brief  visit  to  Africa,  and  this  was  brought  home 
to  me,  on  reaching  the  hotel,  by  being  presented 
with  my  ticket  for  Tangier.  The  ticket  was  a 
soiled  bit  of  pasteboard,  which  seemed  to  have 
done  duty  before,  but  to  which  a  large  gilt  seal 
lent  a  certain  dignity.  It  set  forth  that,  having  paid 
the  sum  of  twenty-seven  pesetas,  I  was  entitled  to 
travel  by  the  s.s.  J.  B.  Llovera,  of  the  Company 
of  Mail  Steam  Ships  of  Africa,  on  her  twenty-first 
voyage  from  Cadiz  to  Tangier.  The  voyage  to 
the  land  of  the  Barbary  pirates  is  not  an  under- 
taking to  be  regarded  lightly,  even  in  these  days. 
The  crossing  is  generally  a  stormy  one  (Baedeker 
warns  any  but  good  sailors  against  attempting  it), 
the  Spanish  coasting  steamers  in  which  it  is  made 
are  not  renowned  either  for  their  size  or  for  their 
comfort,  while  the  rapaciousness  of  the  native 
boatmen  who  take  the  venturesome  traveller 
ashore  at  Tangier  is  proverbial  throughout  the 
whole  of  the  Mediterranean.  On  inquiring 
whether  anyone  else  from  the  hotel  would  be 
proceeding  to  Africa,  I  was  told  that  there  was  a 
French  gentleman  going,  my  informant  adding 
that  this  gentleman  had  also  been  making  a 
similar  inquiry.  Somewhat  comforted  by  this 
intelligence,  I  retired  to  rest  at  an  earlier  hour 
than  usual,  as  the  J.  B.  Llovera  was  timed  to  start 
on  her  twenty-first  voyage  at  7  A.M. 

CHAPTER XV. ALGECIRAS 

WE  left  Gibraltar  at  sunset,  and  in  broad 
daylight ;  but  the  twilight  in  this  part  of 
the  world  is  so  short  that  on  reaching 
Algeciras,  half-an-hour  later,  it  was  pitch  dark.   In 
the  wake  of  the  interpreter  from  the  Hotel  Anglo 
Hispano,    a    very    gentlemanly    individual,    but 
melancholy,  I  stumbled  up  the  narrow  pier  to  the 
shed  which  served  as  a  custom-house. 

An  enormous  amount  of  smuggling  is  done  from 
Gibraltar  into  Spain,  and  I  was  warned  by  the 
interpreter  that  the  examination  would  be  strict. 
But  I  was  hardly  prepared  for  the  severity  of  the 
ordeal  which  followed.  Not  only  was  everything 
opened,  but  everything  was  turned  out  and  ex- 
amined with  a  thoroughness  that  was  as  unusual 
as  it  was  unpleasant.  To  make  matters  worse, 
having  noticed  on  previous  occasions  that  my 
twenty  boxes  of  photographic  films  seemed  to 
excite  suspicion  by  being  packed  all  together,  I 
decided  on  distributing  them,  and  the  result  of  this 
precaution  was  that  little  boxes  of  photographic 
material  were  being  unearthed  at  every  moment 
from  all  sorts  of  odd  holes  and  corners.  This 
served  to  stimulate  the  official  to  further  efforts, 
nor  was  the  repeated  explanation  of  "  Peliculas 
fotograficas,  sefior,"  received  with  any  great 
degree  of  favour.  But  perhaps  Englishmen  are 
not  popular  among  the  people  of  Algeciras,  and 
this  is  hardly  to  be  wondered  at  with  Gibraltar 
ever  before  their  eyes. 

The  Anglo  Hispano  is  a  palatial  hotel  owned 
by  the  English  railway  company.  A  prolonged 
stay  there  would  probably  be  expensive,  but  I 
only  intended  to  remain  one  night,  and  the  com- 
fort and  cleanliness  of  the  hotel,  and  its  very 
recherchee  cuisine,  were  most  welcome  after  the 
rough-and-tumble  of  the  Continental  at  Tangier. 
Moreover,  the  railway  starts  almost  from  the  door, 
and  not,  as  is  usual  in  Spain,  from  a  spot  remote 
from  everywhere. 

Algeciras  is  a  little  watering-place  which  was 
colonized  by  the  Spaniards  who  left  Gibraltar  in 
1704,  when  the  British  took  it  over,  and  its  chief 
claim  to  notoriety  in  these  days  is  the  Morocco 
conference  held  there  in  1906.  There  is  little  to  be 
seen  in  Algeciras,  and,  even  if  there  had  been  more, 
a  pitch  dark  night  and  no  moon  is  not  ordinarily 
favourable  to  sightseeing.  But,  as  luck  would 
have  it,  I  arrived  just  in  time  to  see  one  of  the 
sights  of  which  Algeciras  can  boast,  and  the  con- 
ditions were  ideal  for  seeing  it.  For  Gibraltar 
was  giving  a  searchlight  display,  which  happens, 
so  I  was  told,  three  times  a  week,  and,  if  the 
exact  reason  for  this  is  not  very  obvious  to  the 
civilian,  the  effect  is  none  the  less  wonderful. 
Some  dozen  or  more  searchlights,  placed  in 
various  positions  on  the  Rock,  threw  their  power- 
ful beams  in  all  Directions ;  they  circled  round  the 
bay,  lighting  up  in  their  passage  the  ships  at 
anchor  in  the  harbour,  the  town,  and  the  dark  hills 
in  the  background,  and  finally  swept  out  across  the 
straits,  until  they  seemed  almost  to  reach  the 
rugged  mountains  of  Africa.  It  was  stupendous, 
and  I  watched  it  entranced,  wondering  what  Spain 
thought  of  it  all,  and  how  the  good  people  of 
Algeciras  liked  having  their  sea-front  lit  up  of  an 
evening  in  this  dazzling  fashion  by  England.  I 
was  recalled  to  my  senses  by  the  motor  diligence 
from  Cadiz,  which  could  be  heard  approaching 
from  the  distance,  and  presently  came  speed- 
ing out  of  the  darkness  and  across  the  little 
bridge  over  the  river.  It  was  a  huge  closed  affair, 
passengers  inside,  luggage  on  top,  and  dust  every- 
where. About  a  dozen  individuals  emerged  from 
the  interior,  looking  so  dazed  and  dishevelled  that 
I  was  glad  I  had  not  made  the  trip  as,  at  one  time, 
I  had  thought  of  doing. 

I  left  Algeciras  next  morning,  intending  to  go 
straight  through  to  Granada.  The  trains  connect 
with  the  steamer  from  Gibraltar,  and  the  wisdom 
of  stopping  overnight  at  Algeciras  became  ap- 
parent, as  I  was  enabled  thereby  to  secure  a  corner 
seat  in  the  train  before  the  arrival  of  the  boat 
filled  it  up  with  a  crowd  of  Spanish  and  English 
passengers.  For  companions  on  this  journey  I 
had  a  very  voluble  Spanish  lady  and  her  son,  a 
youth  of  about  twenty,  whom  his  mother  treated 
as  if  he  were  ten,  and  an  English  military  officer, 
a  major,  apparently,  and  his  wife,  who  looked 
an  old  campaigner.  On  taking  her  seat  the  lady 
remarked  with  much  disapproval  that  "  the  local 
peasantry  all  appear  to  be  travelling  first-class  " ; 
but  whether  the  remark  applied  to  me  or  to  my 
two  travelling  companions,  I  was  quite  unable  to 
determine. 

Ronda  is  situated  on  a  plateau  high  up  among 
the  mountains,  and  time  was — and  not  so  very 
long  ago  either — when  it  was  accessible  only  to 
mules,  and  the  prospect  of  capture  by  brigands 
added  interest  to  what  must  have  been  a 
very  fascinating  journey.  But  those  days  have 
gone,  and  now  English  enterprise  takes  the 
traveller  from  the  sea  to  Ronda  in  three  hours 
by  a  single  line  of  railway,  which,  like  some  pro- 
digious serpent,  twists  and  turns  through  the 
mountains  in  a  way  that  is  truly  remarkable.  It 
had  not  been  my  original  intention  to  stop  at 
Ronda,  and  it  was  only  when  Algeciras  was  left 
some  way  behind,  and  the  train,  with  much  puffing 
and  panting,  was  beginning  to  crawl  up  the  first 
gradients,  that  I  decided  to  break  the  journey 
there.  My  ticket  allowed  me  to  do  this,  for  on  the 
line  from  Algeciras  to  Bobadilla  the  kilometric 
was  not  available,  and  I  was  travelling  with  a 
Cook's  ticket  obtained  in  Tangier.  It  takes  a 
whole  day  to  reach  Granada  from  Algeciras,  and 
to  pass  a  whole  day  in  a  hot  and  dusty  train  was 
not  an  alluring  prospect;  furthermore,  I  con- 
eluded  from  my  guide-book,  and  from  what  I  could 
remember  of  Miranda  of  the  Balcony,  that  Ronda 
was  well  worth  a  visit.  The  question  was  quickly 
decided,  and  I  was  free  to  enjoy  the  series  of 
wonderful  views  that  began  to  unfold  themselves 
as  the  train  laboriously  made  its  way  upwards. 

The  line  follows  the  course  of  a  river  that  can 
be  seen  at  the  bottom  of  a  gorge,  far  below  the 
train.  From  one  mountain  defile  to  another  it 
passes,  crossing  and  recrossing  the  river,  and 
plunging  through  innumerable  tunnels,  most  of 
them  short.  The  finest  views  are  obtained  from 
the  right-hand  windows  of  the  train,  and  travellers 
would  be  well  advised  to  secure  seats  on  that 
side  for  the  upward  journey :  unfortunately  I 
discovered  this  too  late,  and  some  of  the 
more  striking  effects  were  lost  to  me;  but  from 
whatever  point  one  views  it,  the  scenery,  with  its 
succession  of  rocky  defiles,  precipitous  gorges  and 
mountain  passes,  cannot  fail  to  impress.  With 
the  possible  exception  of  the  run  from  San 
Sebastian  through  the  mountains  to  Burgos,  I  con- 
sider this  journey  to  be  the  finest  I  made  in  Spain. 

There  is  nothing  whatever  about  the  Algeciras, 
Ronda  and  Bobadilla  Railway  to  denote  its  Eng- 
lish origin.  That  is  a  thing  which,  like  so  much 
else  in  Spain,  one  must  take  on  trust.  The  car- 
nages and  locomotives  are  of  the  ordinary  Spanish 
type;  so,  too,  is  the  speed — though  on  such  a 
journey  no  great  speed  could  reasonably  be  looked 
for.  We  stopped  at  many  wayside  stations  serving 
little  towns  and  villages  that  were  invisible  for  the 
most  part,  being  hidden  in  the  surrounding  moun- 
tains. At  one  of  these  stations  I  was  delighted 
by  the  sight  of  two  magnificent  eagles  poised 
above  the  train  :  it  was  the  first  time  I  had  seen 
eagles  outside  a  zoological  garden,  but  they  were 
quite  unmistakable  as  they  hung  in  the  air,  almost 
motionless,  on  outstretched  wings.  As  we  got 
higher  the  vegetation — cork  and  oak  trees — be- 
came scantier,  and  the  country  more  rugged.  We 
frequently  passed  great  herds  of  goats  clambering 
among  the  rocks,  their  progress  assisted  and 
directed  by  well-aimed  volleys  of  stones  from  the 
hand  of  the  goatherd,  a  practice  I  had  observed  in 
other  parts  of  Spain. 

One  sees  Ronda,  far  above  one,  a  good  hour 
before  reaching  it.  The  town  is  surrounded  by 
precipices  on  all  sides  but  one,  and  even  modern 
engineering  enterprise  has  here  to  bow  to  the 
inevitable,  and  approach  by  a  long  and  devious 
route.  But  at  length  the  train  climbs  to  the  sum- 
mit of  the  plateau,  and,  after  a  short  spurt  along 
the  level,  brings  one  to  Ronda  station,  situated,  as 
by  this  time  I  had  learnt  to  expect,  well  beyond 
the  confines  of  the  town. 

CHAPTER XVI. RONDA 

IT  was  my  good  fortune  while  wandering 
through  Spain  to  put  up  at  some  very  ex- 
cellent hotels,  and  among  them,  for  quiet 
and  refined  comfort,  the  Hotel  Reina  Victoria 
at  Ronda  comes  easily  first.  The  Reina  Victoria 
is  run,  I  believe,  by  the  railway  company,  and  is 
frequented,  if  one  may  judge  from  its  visiting- 
book,  chiefly  by  Englishmen  and  Americans.  It 
is  built  on  the  very  edge  of  a  precipice — an  honest, 
uncompromising  precipice,  which  drops  straight 
down  from  the  hotel  terrace  to  the  valley  600  feet 
beneath.  Across  the  valley  rise  the  mountains 
which  surround  Ronda  on  all  sides,  and  the  whole 
forms  a  panorama  of  exceptional  grandeur.  But 
it  is  not  in  situation  alone  that  the  Reina  Victoria 
excels.  Perhaps  its  leading  feature  is  that  there 
is  nothing  about  it  to  suggest  a  hotel,  except  the 
ubiquitous  bus  that  takes  one  to  and  from  the 
station.  The  hotel  gives  one  the  impression  of  a 
well-appointed  and  well-managed  country  house  : 
it  is  furnished  and  fitted  throughout  by  a  well- 
known  English  firm,  is  under  English  manage- 
ment, and  its  immaculately  garbed  waiters  speak 
English  with  unusual  perfection.  And  the  most 
surprising  thing  of  all  is  that  one  should  drop 
upon  such  a  place  in  Ronda,  an  old-world  town 
high  up  among  the  Andalusian  mountains ! 

Having  removed  some  of  the  signs  of  travel, 
and  being  fortified  with  lunch  and  the  white  wine 
for  which  Ronda  is  famous,  I  set  out  for  an  after- 
noon's exploration  of  the  town.  As  a  show  place, 
there  is  little  to  be  seen  in  Ronda  :  its  chief  attrac- 
tion is  its  unique  situation.  The  town  is  built  on 
a  high  plateau,  which  rises  from  the  centre  of  a 
basin  of  mountains.  On  all  sides  but  one  of  this 
plateau  are  perpendicular  precipices,  while  the 
plateau  itself  is  split  in  two  by  an  immense  chasm, 
called  the  Tajo,  some  500  feet  deep  and  300  feet 
wide.  Ronda  has  been  aptly  compared  to  an  inland 
Gibraltar,  and  it  would  not  be  easy  to  find  a  place 
better  adapted  by  nature  to  purposes  of  defence. 
It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  to  learn  that  the 
town  has  served  successively  as  a  Roman,  a  Moor- 
ish, and  finally  as  a  Christian  stronghold.  Ronda 
surrendered  to  the  Catholic  Kings  in  1485. 

The  gorge  referred  to  above  divides  the  town 
into  two  parts,  and  is  spanned  by  a  remarkable 
bridge,  the  Puente  Nuevo,  or  New  Bridge,  which 
is  only  new,  however,  in  relation  to  the  rest  of 
Ronda,  having  been  built  in  1761.  It  was  towards 
this  bridge  that  I  made  my  way  first,  along  an  ill- 
paved  and  somewhat  mean  street,  which  led  from 
the  hotel  to  the  central  square  of  the  town.  The 
best  view  of  the  bridge  is  from  beneath,  and  with 
the  intention  of  reaching  this  point  of  vantage  I 
set  off  down  a  precipitous  path,  more  suited  to 
the  feet  of  goats  than  to  those  of  human  beings. 
I  was  accompanied  by  a  sturdy  urchin  and  his 
diminutive  sister,  who  had  accosted  me  with  an 
offer  of  their  company,  an  offer  I  deemed  it 
expedient  to  accept,  having  read  that  such  is 
the  best  way  of  keeping  off  the  swarms  of 
children  who  follow  strangers  in  Ronda  in  the 
hope  of  "  little  dogs  "  (as  five-centime  pieces 
are  called,  in  allusion  to  the  lion  which  adorns 
them),  Ronda  being  famous,  even  in  Spain,  for 
its  beggars. 

The  view  is  well  worth  the  breakneck  descent 
and  toilsome  return.  The  bridge  rises  from  the 
bottom  to  the  top  of  the  ravine,  and  consists  of 
three  arches  with  a  central  span — the  latter  ap- 
pearing ludicrously  short  in  comparison  with  its 
immense  height.  Somewhere  at  the  bottom 
of  the  ravine  is  a  meagre  stream — it  can 
hardly  be  called  a  river,  at  all  events  not  at  this 
season — the  Guadalevm,  but,  insignificant  as  the 
stream  appears,  it  is  nevertheless  responsible  for 
the  cutting  of  the  mighty  chasm  in  which  it  is  now 
almost  lost.  In  Moorish  times,  water  from  the 
Guadalevm  was  brought  in  jars  to  the  upper  town 
by  Christian  captives,  the  way  lying  up  a  narrow 
stairway  cut  in  the  living  rock  :  such  at  least  is  the 
tradition.  I  can  vouch  for  the  stairway,  having 
descended  its  dank  and  dismal  depths  in  the  com- 
pany of  a  workman  bearing  a  candle  to  light  the 
way,  and  emerging  at  length  somewhere  beneath 
the  lowest  arch  of  the  bridge. 

Ronda  is  one  of  the  few  places  I  visited  in 
Spain  that  does  not  boast  of  a  cathedral,  but  an 
efficient  substitute  is  found  in  the  church  of  Santa 
Maria  la  Mayor,  originally  a  mosque.  This  I 
inspected,  as  in  duty  bound,  but  its  interior  offer- 
ing nothing  remarkable  I  soon  passed  on  to  the 
Casa  de  Mondragon,  a  house  in  the  Moorish  style 
kept  by  an  amiable  old  lady,  and  built  on  the  very 
edge  of  the  Tajo.  From  the  balcony  there  is  a 
thrilling  view  into  the  abyss  beneath. 

Outside  Mondragon  I  took  leave  of  my  youth- 
ful guides  and  before  parting  photographed  them, 
much  to  the  delight  of  the  children,  who  were 
effusive  in  their  thanks.  But  alas  !  lack  of  famili- 
arity with  a  new  apparatus  resulted  in  the  unfor- 
tunate children  appearing  without  their  heads  ! 

The  principal  lions  of  Ronda  may  be  visited 
easily  within  the  compass  of  a  single  afternoon, 
and  yet  leave  time  for  a  walk  or  a  drive  outside  the 
town,  and  such  an  excursion  is  recommended. 
Walking  perhaps  is  to  be  preferred  to  driving,  as 
the  best  views  can  only  be  obtained  by  leaving  the 
road  and  scrambling  on  foot  among  the  hills — for 
which  purpose  a  pair  of  good  strong  boots  should 
be  donned.  The  surrounding  country  is  bare  and 
arid  to  a  degree,  but  is  none  the  less  striking  on 
that  account.  Of  vegetation  there  is  hardly  a 
sign,  and  great  stones  and  boulders  ("  Tears  of 
Christ  "  they  are  called)  lie  scattered  about  every- 
where. Ronda  is  seen  perched  on  its  plateau, 
whose  precipitous  sides  drop  straight  down  into 
the  valley  below,  and  all  around  are  the  moun- 
tains, grim  and  threatening.  As  at  Avila,  I  was 
long  held,  almost  spellbound,  by  the  weird  beauty 
of  it  all,  and  the  sun  was  sinking  fast  when  I  tore 
myself  away  and  turned  towards  that  "  city  set 
upon  a  hill/' 

It  is  said  that  rain  falls  at  Ronda  only  during 
the  night,  but  none  fell  during  my  stay  there. 
Thunder  rumbled  among  the  mountains,  and  an 
occasional  flash  of  lightning  broke  the  intense 
darkness  of  the  valley,  and  set  the  dogs  all  bark- 
ing ;  but  not  until  the  following  morning  did  a  few 
drops  of  rain  fall — the  first  I  had  seen  in  Spain. 

Soon  after  breakfast  I  bade  farewell  to  the  Reina 
Victoria,  and  was  borne  off  to  the  station,  there  to 
entrain  for  Granada.  I  had  joined  forces  with  an 
English  family  from  the  hotel,  father,  mother  and 
two  charming  daughters,  and  this  agreeable  inter- 
lude in  my  lonely  passage  through  Spain  relieved 
the  tedium  of  the  journey  very  considerably.  My 
companions  were  passengers  by  a  P.  &  O.  steamer, 
and  had  broken  their  journey  at  Gibraltar  in  order 
to  visit  Granada  and  the  Alhambra.  They  were 
travelling  with  a  courier — an  admirable  way  of 
doing  things,  which  is  to  be  commended  to  those 
who  can  afford  it. 

As  far  as  Bobadilla,  forty-four  miles,  we 
travelled  over  the  English  line.  The  way  lies 
through  a  dreary  country,  whose  principal  features 
are  the  large  boulders  previously  referred  to,  and 
cork-trees.  Nothing  of  note  occurred  on  this 
portion  of  the  journey,  except  the  arrival  in  the 
compartment  of  a  large  brown  locust,  some  three 
inches  in  length,  which  found  its  way  in  through 
the  window,  and  settled  down  on  the  arm  of  one 
of  our  party,  resolutely  refusing  to  move  or  be 
disturbed.  All  were  puzzled  as  to  what  it  could 
be,  but,  having  met  the  genus  elsewhere,  I  was 
able  to  identify  it,  much  to  the  delight  of  my 
companions,  who  were  enchanted  by  the  advent 
among  them  of  so  Biblical  a  creature. 

Bobadilla  may  be  described  as  the  Clapham 
Junction  of  Spain.  Everyone  who  travels  in 
Spain  at  all  is  bound  to  go  to  Bobadilla  sooner  or 
later,  but  there  seems  to  be  no  record  of  anyone 
ever  having  penetrated  beyond  the  precincts  of 
the  railway  station.  Even  Baedeker  dismisses  the 
town  with  the  remark  that  the  trains  stop  long 
enough  to  enable  passengers  to  have  a  meal — and 
the  restaurant  is,  perhaps,  as  well  known  as  any  in 
the  Peninsula. 

We  arrived  at  Bobadilla  at  1 1.30,  and  had  about 
thirty-five  minutes  to  wait  before  the  departure 
of  the  Granada  train.  The  time  was  spent,  of 
course,  in  the  restaurant,  for  to  pass  through 
Bobadilla  and  miss  its  one  attraction  would  be  a 
serious  mistake.  Thanks  to  the  systematic  way  in 
which  things  are  arranged  there,  thirty-five  min- 
utes is  ample  for  a  six-course  meal,  beginning  with 
soup,  and  ending  with  the  inevitable  cheese  and 
coffee. 

The  run  of  seventy-six  and  a  half  miles  to 
GranaHa  occupies  five  hours,  and  most  of  that  time 
is  spent  in  crossing  the  Vega,  or  plain  of 
Granada.  To  readers  of  Washington  Irving  the 
Vega  needs  no  introduction  :  in  spring  it  is  said 
to  be  one  great  garden  of  fruit-trees  and  flowers, 
and  then  is  the  time  to  see  it  at  its  best;  but  even 
when  the  fierce  summer  sun  has  burnt  up  the  last 
blade  of  grass,  and  the  soil  is  dried  and  baked  to 
a  brick-like  hardness,  the  Vega  still  retains  its 
greatest  charm,  for  no  sun  could  wither  the  wealth 
of  legend  and  tradition  that  clings  to  every  foot 
of  this  enchanted  ground.  Many  a  pitched  battle 
was  fought  here  between  Christian  and  Moorish 
hosts,  and  many  a  knightly  combat,  ere  Granada 
capitulated  to  the  Catholic  Kings,  and  Boabdil, 
its  last  king,  turned  his  back  upon  Jiis  capital,  and, 
weeping,  fled  over  the  mountains  to  the  coast, 
seeking  a  refuge  in  the  land  his  forefathers  had 
exchanged  for  this  earthly  paradise.  And  now, 
though  Moorish  armies  no  longer  thunder  across 
the  Vega,  their  spirits  linger  on  there,  and  every 
cave,  every  rock,  every  ruined  tower,  has  its  tenant 
held  imprisoned  by  the  power  of  enchantment, 
and  invisible  to  mortal  eyes.  But  it  has  happened 
that  some  (it  may  be  even  within  the  memory  of 
living  man)  have  found  a  talisman — a  quaintly 
engraved  ring,  an  amulet  or  what  not — against 
which  no  enchantment  can  prevail,  and  thus  it 
comes  about  that  we  have  indubitable  testimony 
of  strange  goings  on  in  this  ancient  Moorish  king- 
dom of  Granada.  Thus  it  is  we  know  that  once 
a  year,  at  midnight  on  the  eve  of  St.  John,  the 
spell  holding  these  phantom  hosts  is  broken,  and 
they  are  permitted,  for  a  few  brief  hours,  to  leave 
their  rocks  and  caves,  and  fly  across  the  Vega  on 
the  wings  of  the  wind  to  the  Mountain  of  the  Sun, 
opposite  the  Alhambra,  where  Boabdil  still  holds 
his  ghostly  court.  For  it  is  well  known,  though 
that  lying  jade,  History,  may  not  admit  it,  that 
El  Rey  Chico,  though  seemingly  he  fled  over  the 
mountains  and  beyond  the  sea  to  Africa,  was  in 
fact  conducted  by  the  spirits  to  the  cavernous 
depths  of  the  Mountain  of  the  Sun,  there  to  re- 
main until  the  time  should  be  ripe  for  the  removal 
of  all  enchantments,  when  he  will  issue  forth  at 
the  head  of  his  army,  and  the  Christians  will  be 
driven  back  to  those  distant  regions  from  whence 
they  came.  Then  the  Crescent  will  glisten  once 
more  over  Granada,  and  the  Alhambra  will  be 
restored  to  all  its  pristine  glory. 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  a  journey  over  the 
Vega,  even  though  performed  in  a  puffing  Spanish 
train,  should  not  be  dull,  and  forms  a  not  un- 
fitting prelude  to  a  visit  to  Granada,  providing 
always  that  the  traveller  knows  his  Irving — but 
the  notion  that  any  pilgrim  to  the  shrine  of  the 
Alhambra  should  not  know  his  Irving  may  be 
dismissed  as  being  unworthy  of  serious  considera- 
tion. And  so  we  passed,  at  fifteen  miles  an  hour, 
through  this  land  of  enchantments,  dividing  our 
attentions  between  its  tales  of  wonder  and  the 
fruits  of  its  soil — pears,  peaches,  grapes  and  figs, 
sold  at  all  the  stations  at  twopence-halfpenny  a 
large  basket. 

Late  in  the  afternoon  we  reached  Granada,  and 
here  I  took  leave  of  my  travelling  companions, 
who  were  proceeding  to  a  new  and  particularly 
sumptuous  hotel,  which  has  recently  been  built 
within  a  few  minutes  of  the  Alhambra.  I,  more 
modest  in  my  requirements,  chose  a  Spanish 
hostelry,  the  Alameda;  and,  though  I  made  the 
choice  with  some  misgivings,  my  confidence  in 
Baedeker's  "  star "  of  commendation  was  not 
misplaced.  For  many  reasons  I  now  consider  a 
hotel  in  the  Alhambra  would  be  preferable  to  one 
in  the  town,  but  to  those  who  would  prefer  the 
life  and  movement  of  Granada  to  the  wooded 
heights  of  the  Alhambra,  I  would  recommend  the 
Alameda  without  any  hesitation. 

CHAPTER XVII. GRANADA 

GRANADA    was    en   fete,    the    occasion 
being  the  Feast  of  Our  Lady  of  Sorrows. 
Perhaps  Our  Lady  of  Sorrows  appeals  in 
some  special  way  to  the  Spaniard,  who  has  a  pro- 
nounced strain  of  melancholy  in  his  character, 
and  certain  it  is  that  the  people  of  Granada  threw 
themselves  into  the  celebration  of  this  fiesta  with 
all  the  enthusiasm  at  their  command.    No  sooner 
had  I  been  assigned  my  room  in  the  hotel  than  I 
was   advised   to   betake   myself   at   once   to   the 
Alameda,  along  which  the  procession  was  to  pass 
—the  recommendation  being  accompanied  by  an 
injunction  to  beware  of  pickpockets. 

The  procession,  on  the  whole,  was  disappoint- 
ing. A  number  of  frock-coated  individuals  led 
the  way,  gossiping  and  laughing,  and  each  bear- 
ing a  gigantic  wax  candle,  lighted,  and  carried 
in  many  instances  under  the  arm,  with  the  flame 
downwards — an  extravagant  method,  to  say  the 
least  of  it.  Next  came  the  police,  and  a  great 
number  of  civic  and  other  dignitaries,  then  the 
school  children,  and  finally  the  image  of  Our 
Lady,  whose  arrival  was  greeted  by  the  crowd 
with  enthusiastic  vivas,  and  by  letting  off  rockets, 
which  exploded  with  a  series  of  loud  bangs  in 
the  bright  afternoon  sunshine.  The  procession 
was  of  prodigious  length,  and  moved  with  in- 
credible slowness,  as  the  weight  of  the  image 
necessitated  a  halt  every  few  minutes  to  give  the 
bearers  a  rest.  I  did  not  discover  what  the 
objective  point  of  the  procession  was,  but  having 
moved  off  at  about  six,  it  had  returned  to  its 
original  starting-point  by  eleven,  after  passing 
through  the  principal  streets  of  the  town.  Its 
passage  after  dark  was  marked  by  illuminations, 
and,  as  the  image  of  Our  Lady  was  borne 
past,  by  various  kinds  of  fireworks — rockets, 
squibs,  crackers,  Catherine  wheels,  and  even  big 
set  pieces;  not  a  very  safe  proceeding,  con- 
sidering the  crowded  state  of  the  streets.  The 
din  was  considerably  augmented  by  individual 
enthusiasts  with  rattles,  trumpets  and  other  wind 
instruments.  Thus,  during  my  first  night  at 
Granada,  pandemonium  reigned,  and  was  kept 
up  until  well  into  the  morning.  But  at  length 
the  last  rocket  exploded,  and  the  revolutions  of 
the  rattles  became  fewer,  until  at  last  silence  fell 
upon  the  city. 

Granada,  former  capital  of  the  Moorish  king- 
dom of  Granada,  is  one  of  the  oldest  cities  in 
Spain.  Its  rise  began  with  the  decline  of  Cordova 
in  the  eleventh  century,  and  from  that  time  until 
the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  Granada 
maintained  a  position  of  supremacy.  The  fall  of 
the  kingdom  and  its  capital  was  brought  about, 
as  so  often  happens,  by  internal  dissensions,  and, 
as  is  generally  the  way,  there  was  a  woman  in  the 
case.  To  Zoraya,  a  young  Christian  slave  who 
had  embraced  Mohammedanism,  belongs  the  dis- 
tinction of  firing  the  train  which  led  to  the  final 
disruption  of  the  Moorish  empire  in  Spain.  By 
her  charms  she  captivated  the  heart  of  her 
sovereign,  Abdul  Hasan,  and  to  such  a  pass  did 
things  come  that  serious  trouble  arose  between 
the  King  and  his  wife,  Aisha.  Had  the  matter 
stopped  there  all  might  have  been  well,  but,  un- 
fortunately for  the  kingdom  of  Granada,  things 
went  a  good  deal  further,  and  what  had  begun  as 
a  domestic  difference  ended  in  civil  strife.  Two 
prominent  noble  families,  the  Zegris  and  the 
Abencerrages,  took  the  parts  of  the  King  and  of 
the  Queen  respectively,  and  the  kingdom  was  split 
up  into  contending  factions.  Aisha  was  im- 
prisoned in  the  Alhambra,  from  whence  she 
escaped,  lowering  herself  and  her  two  sons, 
Boabdil  and  Yusuf ,  from  a  window  into  the  valley 
beneath,  and  taking  refuge  in  the  hills  near 
Granada,  where  Boabdil  was  proclaimed  King. 
"El  Rey  Chico"  (the  little  king)  dethroned  his 
father,  but,  after  many  ups  and  downs,  and  after 
being  twice  captured  by  the  Spaniards,  who  had 
utilized  these  feuds  to  their  own  ends,  he  was 
finally  compelled  to  evacuate  Granada,  which 
passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Catholic  Kings  in 
1491.  The  event  was  made  the  occasion  of 
rejoicing  throughout  all  Christen'dom,  a  special 
Te  Deum  being  sung  in  St.  Paul's  for  the  over- 
throw of  the  Moorish  empire  in  Europe.  Boabdil 
with  his  mother,  Aisha,  fled  to  Africa,  leaving  one 
of  the  fairest  kingdoms  in  the  world  in  the  hands 
of  the  enemies  of  his  race  and  of  his  faith.  It  is 
related  that,  as  he  crossed  the  Sierra  Nevada,  he 
reached  a  spot,  now  known  as  "  The  Last  Sigh 
of  the  Moor,"  from  whence,  spread  out  at  his  feet, 
he  could  see  Granada,  the  Vega,  and  all  that 
he  was  leaving,  while  before  him  was  the  sea, 
which  he  was  about  to  cross  into  exile.  Over- 
come by  emotion,  Boabdil  could  not  restrain  his 
tears;  but  his  mother  was  made  of  sterner  stuff. 
'  Weep,"  was  her  bitter  comment,  "  weep,  like 
a  woman,  for  a  kingdom  thou  coulclst  not  defend 
like  a  man !  '  On  the  departure  of  the  Moors, 
the  city  of  Granada  fell  into  decay,  while  the 
kingdom,  as  a  Spanish  province,  suffered  sadly 
from  the  neglect  of  its  new  rulers.  Modern 
Granada  has  been  described  as  "  a  living  ruin," 
but  the  epithet,  which  might  well  be  applied  to 
Cordova,  seems  too  severe  when  used  with  refer- 
ence to  Granada. 

During  my  stay,  the  heat  was  abnormal,  the 
thermometer  indicating  well  over  100°  in  the 
shade,  a  temperature  calculated  to  try  the  powers 
even  of  the  most  enthusiastic  of  sightseers.  As 
a  result,  my  experiences  there  were  mainly  con- 
fined to  wandering  slowly  along  the  shady  side 
of  the  streets,  and  visiting  the  cool  and  dark 
depths  of  the  cathedral.  The  latter  did  not 
differ  greatly  from  other  cathedrals  I  had  seen, 
except,  perhaps,  that  it  was  a  little  darker,  and 
the  familiar  taper  affixed  to  a  pole  was  called 
into  requisition  a  little  oftener.  In  the  Royal 
Chapel  I  was  shown  the  tombs  of  the  Catholic 
Kings,  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  :  their  coffins  lie 
in  a  dark  vault,  temporarily  illumined  for  my 
benefit  by  the  light  of  a  wax  match,  carelessly 
struck  on  the  marble  resting-place  of  the  coffins. 
The  place  was  littered  all  over  with  the  remains 
of  wax  vestas,  betokening  previous  visitors. 

My  wanderings  through  the  streets  of  Granada 
were  singularly  fruitless,  and  resulted  in  nothing 
more  than  the  purchase  of  some  little  clay  figures 
of  bull  fighters,  which  subsequently  reached  far- 
off  Russia  in  a  more  or  less  battered  condition. 
I  could  see  nothing  about  Granada  to  imply 
either  ruin  or  decay;  on  the  contrary,  the  main 
thoroughfares,  with  their  electric  trams  and 
up-to-date  shops,  suggested  a  certain  prosperity, 
while  the  side  streets  were  certainly  no  worse  than 
those  of  other  cities  in  Spain. 

A  feature  of  Granada,  which  in  some  unac- 
countable way  I  missed  seeing,  is  the  Albaicm, 
or  gipsy  quarter.  It  contains  a  great  number  of 
churches  and  ancient  buildings,  but  undoubtedly 
the  chief  attraction  is  the  gipsies,  who  dance  in 
caves  for  the  edification  of  the  stranger,  "  a 
performance,"  gravely  remarks  Baedeker,  "  more 
notable  for  its  expense  than  for  its  interest  (five 
to  ten  pesetas  a  head)."  Be  this  as  it  may,  the 
performance  is  one  which  lacks  neither  supporters 
nor  admirers,  and  the  charge  mentioned  by 
Baedeker  is  considerably  less  than  what  a  Russian 
friend  of  mine  in  Petersburg  told  me  he  had  paid 
to  see  it.  Speaking  of  these  dances,  Hare  says 
"  At  Granada,  a  few  women  in  tawdry  white 
gowns  extort  five  francs  from  every  individual 
of  the  large  audiences  who  have  the  folly  to  meet 
to  see  them  .  .  . ,"  so  that  even  in  Hare's  time  these 
dances  seem  to  have  possessed  the  same  popu- 
larity and  expensiveness  which  characterizes 
them  to-day.  Of  their  caves  (also  a  centre  of 
attraction  for  tourists),  the  same  authority  writes 
"  They  are  perforated  in  the  living  rock,  beneath 
immense  prickly  pears,  which  serve  at  once  as 
food,  shade  and  protection.  The  mouths  of  these 
caves  are  whitewashed,  and  the  entrances  gener- 
ally guarded  by  a  piece  of  old  carpet.  There  the 
savage  families  bask  all  day  in  the  sun,  and  make 
the  air  resound  all  day  with  their  harsh  guttural 
cries  and  songs.  The  women  who  do  not  steal  earn 
money  by  telling  fortunes  and  selling  amulets; 
the  children  who  are  not  busy  begging  roll  in  the 
rdust  in  front  of  their  caves,  often  quite  naked, 
and  without  any  distinction  of  sex."  The  de- 
scription would  probably  apply  equally  well  in 
these  days,  though  many  of  these  primitive  dwell- 
ings are  now  lit  by  electric  light,  which  would  go 
far  to  take  the  romance  out  of  even  a  whitewashed 
cave  surrounded  by  prickly  pears,  and  guarded  by 
a  piece  of  old  carpet. 

But    cave-dwellers    are    not    confined    to    the 
Albaicm,  as  I  discovered  when  I  took  a  walk  up 
the  Mountain  of  the  Sun  to  the  Silla  del  Moro 
(Seat  of  the  Moor).  It  may  be  remembered  that 
beneath  the  Mountain  of  the  Sun  Boabdil  still 
holds  his  phantom  court,  to  which,  on  the  eve  of 
St.  John,  his  followers  hurry  from  all  parts  of 
Spain,  released  for  a  few  hours  from  their  en- 
chantment. It  was  a  piping  hot  morning  when 
•  I  set  out  for  that  eminence,  taking  the  electric  tram 
which  crawls  slowly  up  the  steep  streets  leading 
towards  the  Alhambra,  until  at  length  it  reaches 
a  point  where  it  can  go  no  farther,  and  the  driver, 
conductor  and  passengers  change  over  into  a  car 
worked  by  a  cogged  wheel  and  toothed  rail  on  the 
funicular  system.  From  the  tram  terminus,  at  the 
very  gates  of  the  Alhambra,  I  began  my  walk 
through  a  shady  wood,  but  left  it  behind  all  too 
soon,  to  continue  my  way  along  the  Camino 
del  Cementario.  Before  reaching  the  cemetery 
one  turns  to  the  left,  following  a  rough  cart  track 
through  a  plantation  of  olive-trees — trees,  it  may 
be  remarked,  which,  for  all  the  protection  they 
afford  in  hot  weather,  might  just  as  well  not  exist 
at  all.  The  Silla  del  Moro  now  lay  on  the  left, 
and  presently  it  became  necessary  to  leave  the 
cart  track  and  the  elusive  shade  of  the  olive-trees, 
and  scramble  boldly  up  the  barren  and  rocky 
side  of  the  hill. 

I  noticed  that  the  rugged  hills  among  which 
I  was  now  wandering  abounded  in  caves,  pre- 
sumably the  dwelling-places  of  gipsies.  In  size 
these  caves  ranged  from  the  very  small,  which 
would  hardly  have  accommodated  a  child,  to 
those  large  enough  to  lodge  an  entire  family  of 
gipsies.  None,  so  far  as  I  was  able  to  judge, 
were  particularly  suited  to  dancing,  nor  were  any 
lit  by  electric  light,  or  even  whitewashed — and 
from  this  I  concluded  I  had  before  me  the  real 
thing,  and  not  the  show  places  kept  by  the  gipsies 
of  the  Albaicm.  Some  of  the  caves  boasted  of 
a  plot  of  ground  enclosed  by  a  rough  stone  wall. 
I  saw  no  sign  of  their  tenants;  indeed,  the  only 
living  things  I  encountered  during  the  first  part 
of  my  climb  among  the  hills  were  grasshoppers, 
quite  unmistakable  grasshoppers  they  were,  too, 
until,  springing  high  into  the  air,  they  spread  blue 
or  red  wings,  an'd  fluttered  off — equally  unmistak- 
able butterflies  ! 

Half-way  up  the  hillside  I  met  a  peasant  with 
his  mule,  its  panniers  laden  with  stones  and  earth, 
descending  the  path.  Now  the  mule  is  at  all 
times  a  capricious  beast,  who,  when  aroused, 
expresses  his  emotions  in  no  uncertain  fashion. 
So  I  expected  there  would  be  trouble ;  and  trouble 
there  was,  directly  the  mule  caught  sight  of  me. 
The  sight  was  too  much  for  him  on  that  hot 
morning,  and  he  incontinently  bolted,  dragging 
his  unfortunate  master,  all  protesting,  in  his  wake. 
Faster  and  faster  down  the  hill  sped  the  pair, 
stones  flying  from  under  their  feet,  anH  the  con- 
tents of  the  baskets  scattering  themselves  in  all 
directions.  From  being  at  first  disconcerting, 
the  performance  rapidly  became  diverting,  more 
especially  as  the  distance  increased.  Finally  the 
mule  shook  himself  free  from  all  control,  upset 
the  last  remnants  of  his  load,  and  made  off  down 
the  road  leading  through  the  olive-trees.  His 
master,  as  though  not  unused  to  such  pranks, 
followed  more  leisurely,  and  when,  from  the  Seat 
of  the  Moor,  half-an-hour  later,  I  caught  sight  of 
them  again,  they  were  trudging  patiently  along 
side  by  side,  as  though  neither  had  ever  had  a 
care  in  the  world. 

Much  refreshed  by  this  incident,  I  continued 
my  uphill  way,  and  in  due  course  reached  the 
Seat  of  the  Moor.  That  the  climb  had  been 
attended  with  a  good  deal  of  physical  discomfort 
is  not  to  be  denied,  but  the  glorious  view  from  the 
top,  and  the  cool  breeze  that  blew  there,  were 
ample  repayment.  All  around  lay  the  tawny, 
rugged  hills,  like  the  one  I  had  climbed, 
seared  with  dry  water-courses,  and  covered  with 
boulders,  while  in  the  distance,  the  majestic 
sierras  reared  their  huge  bulk  against  the  steely 
blue  sky.  The  road  by  which  I  had  come  had 
wound  off  from  the  foot  of  the  hill  towards  the 
wooded  heights  where  the  red  walls  and  towers 
of  the  Alhambra  lay,  half  hidden,  among  the  trees, 
while  beyond  was  Granada,  and  beyond  Granada 
the  Vega,  stretching  away  until  the  eye  could 
follow  it  no  farther,  and  finally  lost  it  in  the 
mysterious  distance  where  earth  and  sky  met. 

CHAPTER    XVIII. THE  ALHAMBRA 

THE  red  palace  of  the  Moorish  kings 
stands  on  the  summit  of  a  steep  hill, 
overlooking  Granada,  and  to  the  discri- 
minating it  is  the  culminating  point  of  a  visit  to 
Spain.  I  feel  that  to  describe  the  Alhambra  in 
any  detail  would  be  out  of  place  here,  even  if 
I  were  competent  to  undertake  such  a  task,  so,  as 
it  cannot  be  passed  without  some  special  mention, 
I  will  content  myself  with  saying,  in  as  few  words 
as  possible,  what  the  Alhambra  is;  and  I  make 
no  apology  for  this,  as  the  subject  is  one  of  which 
most  people  who  have  not  visited  Spain  are 
woefully  ignorant. 

Originally  a  fortress  and  the  residence  of  the 
sultans  of  Granada,  the  Alhambra  is,  perhaps, 
the  best  surviving  example  of  Moorish  art  in 
Spain,  rivalling  both  the  mosque  at  Cordova  and 
the  Alcazar  at  Seville.  Externally  there  is  no- 
thing about  it  to  attract  attention,  for  the  Moors 
avoided  all  outward  display,  fearful  that  it  might 
attract  the  jealous  attentions  of  their  deity,  but 
for  grace  and  delicate  beauty  the  halls  and  courts 
of  the  Alhambra  are  unrivalled,  while  the  marvel- 
lous tales  that  its  walls  might  tell,  if  only  their 
stones  could  speak,  would  be  difficult  to  equal 
anywhere.  When  to  these  advantages  there  is 
added  that  of  a  romantic  situation  on  a  verdure- 
clad  hill  commanding  views  of  the  city  beneath, 
the  Vega  stretching  away  to  the  horizon  and  the 
snow-clad  sierras  in  the  distance,  it  will  be  seen 
that  the  Alhambra  is  singularly  well  favoured 
both  by  nature  and  by  man. 

The  Alhambra  probably  owes  its  fame  to-day, 
and  perhaps  even  its  preservation,  to  its  chronicler, 
Washington  Irving,  and  it  may  be  that  this  is  the 
reason  why  it  is  so  much  better  known  to  trans- 
atlantic visitors  than  to  our  own  countrymen. 
When  Irving  came  to  Granada,  he  found  the 
Alhambra  a  neglected  ruin,  tenanted  by  an  old 
caretaker,  whom  he  calls  Tia  Antonia,  and  by  her 
family,  who,  for  such  care  as  they  could  bestow 
on  the  place,  were  allowed  to  keep  the  produce 
of  the  gardens,  and  whatever  fees  they  might  re- 
ceive from  visitors.  Irving,  with  a  Russian  friend, 
of  whom  we  are  told  little,  first  took  up  his  quarters 
at  an  inn  in  Granada ;  but  on  visiting  the  Governor 
of  the  Alhambra  at  his  residence  in  the  city,  the 
latter  jokingly  offered  Irving  and  his  friend  the 
use  of  the  Governor's  own  apartments  in  the 
Alhambra,  if  they  cared  to  occupy  them.  Believ- 
ing the  offer  to  be  made  in  compliance  with  the 
rules  of  that  punctilio  and  ceremonial  politeness 
which  regulate  all  social  intercourse  in  Spain, 
the  offer  was  at  first  courteously  waved  aside.  But 
the  Governor  was  in  earnest,  and  on  discover- 
ing this,  Irving  grasped  the  golden  opportunity 
at  once,  and,  as  he  puts  it,  "  succeeded  to  the 
throne  of  Boabdil."  The  Russian  was  soon 
called  away  on  business,  and  one  cannot  help 
feeling  that  this  must  have  been  a  relief  to  the 
retiring  Irving,  who  thereupon  deserted  the 
Governor's  room,  and  took  up  his  abode  in  a 
remote  wing  of  the  palace,  the  haunt  of  bats, 
beggars  and  vagrants,  in  spite  of  the  horrified 
protests  of  Tia  Antonia  and  her  family.  There 
he  collected  the  scattered  web  of  legend  which 
clung  to  the  place,  and  wrote  The  Alhambra,  a 
work  which  delighted  the  world  and  aroused  the 
Spanish  guardians  of  the  Alhambra  to  a  sense  of 
their  responsibilities.  But  though  Irving  was 
instrumental  in  saving  the  Moorish  palace  from 
the  indifference  of  its  custodians  and  from  the 
destructive  hands  of  time  and  of  the  elements, 
the  Alhambra,  as  he  knew  it,  has  passed  away 
for  ever  and  it  is  now  little  better  than  a  cosmo- 
politan show  place,  inhabited  by  a  horde  of  indo- 
lent custodians  with  a  flow  of  parrot-like  gabble 
ever  on  their  lips,  and  an  eye  only  for  pesetas ! 

The  Alhambra  has  always  held  itself  aloof  from 
the  city  at  its  feet :  it  has  its  own  churches,  streets, 
shops,  hotels  and  boarding  houses,  while,  to  make 
its  isolation  still  more  complete,  the  whole  is 
surrounded  by  a  mediaeval  wall  with  massive 
towers  at  intervals.  On  the  morning  after  my 
arrival,  I  set  out,  accompanied  by  a  guide  who 
had  fastened  himself  upon  me  overnight,  to  "do" 
the  Alhambra  in  the  orthodox  fashion  of  the 
tourist,  and  for  some  reason  that  is  even  now  not 
quite  clear,  the  guide  chose  to  go  there  on  foot, 
instead  of  engaging  a  coche  and  saving  himself 
the  fatigues  of  a  walk  up  the  hill.  The  approach, 
when  the  steep  and  winding  streets  of  Granada 
have  been  left  behind,  lies  through  a  grove  of 
magnificent  elms,  planted  by  (of  all  people)  the 
Duke  of  Wellington !  Well-kept  roads  and 
paths  traverse  this  shady  wood,  which  is  irrigated 
and  cooled  by  streams  of  rushing  water,  for  which 
the  former  Moorish  occupants  are  to  be  thanked. 
It  is  said  that  in  the  spring  innumerable  nightin- 
gales sing  all  day  and  all  night  in  the  branches 
of  the  trees,  but  of  this  I  am  unable  to  speak 
from  personal  knowledge.  The  wood  itself,  how- 
ever, offers  such  abundant  attractions,  that  the 
most  captious  critic  might  well  overlook  the 
absence  of  nightingales,  and,  indeed,  a  more  ideal 
place  of  refuge  from  the  overpowering  heat  of 
an  Andalusian  summer  day  could  not  possibly  be 
imagined. 

Following  a  broad  carriage  road  through  the 
trees,  we  presently  reached  the  Gate  of  Justice, 
a  massive  gateway  giving  access  to  the  Alhambra 
proper.  The  gate  takes  its  name  from  the 
Moorish  custom  of  administering  justice  at  the 
gate  of  the  city — a  sight  that  may  be  seen  at 
Tangier  by  those  who  care  to  look  for  it.  But 
the  Gate  of  Justice  is  a  fortress  rather  than  a 
gate,  and,  in  order  to  facilitate  its  defence,  the 
road  passing  beneath  it  is  made  to  take  a  sharp 
turn  before  emerging  from  what  is  called  the 
Inner  Gate.  Above  the  Outer  Gate  is  carved  a 
hand,  emblematic  of  Doctrine,  while  over  the 
Inner  Gate  is  a  key,  symbol  of  Power ;  and  tradi- 
tion had  it  that  the  Alhambra  (which  was  origin- 
ally built  by  magic)  would  remain  standing  until 
the  hand  should  grasp  the  key,  in  spite  of  the 
attacks  of  foes  and  the  earthquakes  which  from 
time  to  time  have  proved  so  disastrous  to  other 
buildings  in  this  part  of  Spain. 

From  the  Gate  of  Justice,  the  road,  still 
ascending,  takes  one  to  the  top  of  the  hill,  where 
the  broad  Plaza  de  los  Algibes  (Place  of  the 
Cisterns)  fronts  the  Moorish  palace,  and  the 
palace  begun  by  Charles  V,  but  never  finished. 
Under  the  plasa  are  the  Moorish  cisterns  giving 
it  its  name,  while  in  one  corner  a  well  supplies 
thirsty  visitors,  as  well  as  the  army  of  Granada 
water-sellers,  with  the  purest  water,  of  icy  coldness. 
The  water-sellers  carry  the  refreshing  fluid  down 
into  the  city  beneath  on  the  backs  of  donkeys. 

No  photographs  may  be  taken  inside  the 
Alhambra  without  permission,  and  my  first  care 
was  to  obtain  from  an  official  the  necessary  permit 
"  para  saccar  f  otografias  con  aparato  de  mano  " 
(to  take  photographs  with  a  hand  camera),  a 
permission  which  is  readily  granted  on  payment 
of  fifty  centimos,  but  is  available  for  the  day 
of  issue  only.  This  formality  complied  with, 
we  passed  through  the  entrance  and  plunged  at 
once  in  medias  res. 
One  comes  first  to  the  Court  of  Myrtles,  with 
its  placid  fishpond,  and  the  myrtle  hedges  which 
give  it  its  name.  No  fish  are  to  be  observed  in 
the  pond,  but  happily  it  has  not  yet  occurred  to 
the  authorities  to  empty  out  the  water.  Beyond 
is  the  Hall  of  the  Ambassadors,  from  one  of 
whose  windows  Aisha  lowered  herself  and  her  two 
sons,  and  where,  later,  the  hapless  Boabdil  sum- 
moned the  last  assembly  of  Moors  to  consider  the 
surrender  of  Granada  to  the  Catholic  Kings. 
Here  Irving,  wandering,  lamp  in  hand,  during 
the  first  night  of  his  sojourn  in  the  deserted 
wing,  and  starting,  as  well  he  might,  at  every 
shadow,  heard  blood-curdling,  but  unmistakable 
human  yells  and  howlings — proceeding  from 
beneath  the  pavement !  He  fled  in  terror  to  his 
apartment  and  locked  himself  in,  completely 
cured  for  the  time  being  of  all  wish  to  explore 
the  Alhambra  by  lamplight.  The  yells,  it 
transpired  next  morning,  were  the  ravings  of  a 
poor  mad  brother  of  Tia  Antonia,  whom,  during 
his  bad  attacks,  his  thoughtful  relatives  were  in 
the  habit  of  confining  in  a  vault  beneath  the  Hall 
of  the  Ambassadors,  where  he  would  hurt  no  one, 
and  would  help,  in  no  small  measure,  to  maintain 
the  reputation  of  the  place  as  the  abode  of  dis- 
traught spirits ! 

Second  in  size  to  the  Court  of  Myrtles,  and  no 
less  renowned,  is  the  Court  of  Lions,  so  called 
from  the  fountain  with  its  twelve  rudely  carved 
lions.  In  the  time  of  Tia  Antonia  these  and 
other  fountains  played  continuously,  as  the  ori- 
ginal  designers  of  the  Alhambra  intended  they 
should  :  but  now,  for  reasons  of  thrift,  or  for  some 
other  unworthy  motive,  the  fountains  are  dry,  and 
no  water  gushes  from  the  mouths  of  the  lions, 
or  fills  the  marble  basins  and  tiny  channels 
constructed  to  receive  it.  Adjoining  the  Court  of 
Lions  are  other  halls,  one  of  which  is  known  as 
the  Hall  of  the  Abencerrages.  In  this  hall 
thirty-three  of  the  Abencerrages,^  invited  by 
Boabdil  to  a  banquet  in  the  Court  of  Lions,  were 
traitorously  put  to  death,  their  blood  mingling 
with  the  waters  of  the  fountain,  and  leaving  stains 
which  are  pointed  out,  by  the  less  scrupulous 
guides,  to  this  day. 

Wandering  through  other  halls  and  Ratios,  my 
guide  brought  me  at  length  to  the  Peinador  de  la 
Reina  (the  Queen's  Boudoir),  a  little  room  with 
a  balcony  which  commands  a  singularly  fine 
view  of  the  Albaicin  and  the  background  of 
mountains.  The  walls  of  this  chamber  are 
adorned  with  grotesque  frescoes,  sadly  defaced 
by  the  French  during  their  occupancy  of  the 
Alhambra,  and  representing  Spanish  naval  vic- 
tories over  the  Moors.  "  What  barbarians  did 
this?  );  once  asked  a  French  general  of  the 
Spanish  guide  who  accompanied  him,  indicating 
the  vandalism.  "  Les  frangais,  mon  general," 
was  the  laconic  reply.  The  parapets  of  the 
balcony  also  bear  the  marks  of  the  French  in  the 
form  of  names  and  initials  cut  deep  into  the  marble. 
The  story  has  it  that  the  French,  before  vacating 
the  Alhambra,  tried  to  blow  it  up,  but  a  Spanish 
soldier,  at  imminent  peril  to  himself,  extinguished 
the  burning  fuse  and  saved  the  place.  The  story 
may  be  true,  and  one  would  like  to  think  of  Spain 
showing  such  appreciation,  but  the  fact  remains  that 
until  Washington  Irving  took  the  matter  up,  Spain 
showed  the  same  callousness  in  her  treatment 
of  the  Alhambra  that  characterizes  her  yet  with 
regard  to  her  other  national  monuments. 

Such  is  a  brief  outline  of  some  of  the  chief 
features  of  the  Alhambra,  but  no  bare  descrip- 
tion of  the  halls  and  courts  can  do  justice  to  the 
place  :  to  be  appreciated  it  must  be  seen  and 
judged  as  a  united  whole,  with  all  its  wealth  of 
colour  and  design.  Nor  can  a  single  visit  convey 
anything  but  the  most  hazy  impression;  the 
Alhambra  should  be  visited  and  revisited,  and 
without  a  guide,  if  such  a  thing  is  possible.  One 
cannot  but  envy  Irving  his  unparalleled  oppor- 
tunities of  studying  every  phase  and  aspect  of  the 
Alhambra,  which  in  these  days  is  tied  up  with 
red  tape,  and  haunted  by  rapacious  guides — evils 
which  grow  worse  as  time  goes  on.  There  was  a 
time  when  one  could  wander  through  the  place 
by  moonlight,  and  when  it  could  even  be  hired 
for  private  parties,  but  nothing  of  the  kind  is 
permitted  now — and  perhaps  it  is  as  well,  or  the 
Alhambra  would  be  transported  piecemeal  across 
the  Atlantic,  and  be  distributed  over  the  whole 
of  the  continent  of  America.  So  the  authorities 
run  it  on  purely  commercial  lines,  as  commerce 
is  understood  in  Spain :  the  numberless  custo- 
dians  are  ever  on  the  look  out  for  fees;  vendors 
of  picture  post-cards  and  gaudy  souvenirs  dog 
one's  footsteps  at  every  turn ;  while,  as  a  crowning 
horror,  and  a  culminating  insult  to  the  spirits  of 
the  place,  a  studio  has  been  arranged  where 
one  may  be  photographed,  in  borrowed  plumes, 
as  a  Moorish  chieftain  or  an  inmate  of  the  harem  ! 
Of  the  upstart  palace  of  Charles  V  little  need 
be  said.  It  was  begun  in  1526,  half  the  Alhambra 
being  pulled  down  to  make  room  for  it.  But  the 
fear  of  earthquakes  caused  Charles  to  relinquish 
his  plan  of  living  there;  the  work  was  stopped, 
and  the  palace  remains  to-day  as  it  was  left — a 
roofless  and  unfinished  ruin. 

CHAPTER XIX. BAEZA 

WITH  Granada,  my  journey  through 
Spain  drew  towards  a  close.  I  had 
seen  the  Alhambra,  and,  as  that  was 
the  last  item  on  my  programme,  there  remained 
nothing  but  to  take  the  train  home  by  the  shortest 
possible  route.  Two  ways  were  open  :  I  might 
return  to  Bobadilla,  and  from  there  travel 
through  Cordova  to  Madrid,  or  I  might  join  the 
main  line  beyond  Cordova  at  the  little  junction 
of  Baeza,  and  so  cut  off  a  big  corner.  The  latter 
involved  a  cross-country  journey,  but  it  was  so 
much  shorter  in  actual  distance,  that  I  unhesita- 
tingly chose  it.  It  proved  to  be  much  longer  in 
the  end,  as  I  shall  show  presently. 

I  left  Granada  in  the  evening,  after  an  early 
dinner,  driving  to  the  station  over  one  of  the  worst 
roads  I  have  ever  seen  anywhere.  For  the 
second  time  in  my  travels  the  kilometric  failed 
me,  and  to  Baeza  the  ordinary  fare  had  to  be 
paid.  We  were  due  at  this  place  at  two  in  the 
morning,  and  there  it  would  be  necessary  to  book 
again  and  re-register  the  luggage. 

The  journey  to  Baeza  was  uneventful,  but  was 
enlivened  by  the  constant  whistling  of  the  engine, 
a  performance  that  usually  took  the  form  of  a 
prolonged  shriek,  followed  by  as  many  short 
blasts  as  the  circumstances  of  the  case  called  for. 
It  was  impossible,  owing  to  the  darkness,  to 
ascertain  precisely  the  reasons  for  this  ear- 
splitting  din,  but  it  was  indulged  in  at  all 
cuttings,  crossings,  bridges  and  turnings,  and 
apparently  whenever  the  driver  thought  that  the 
passengers  needed  enlivening.  As  a  consequence, 
anything  in  the  shape  of  protracted  repose  was 
impossible. 

We  reached  Baeza  at  2.20  A.M.,  and,  as  the  train 
went  no  farther,  everyone  was  turned  out  on  to 
the  platform  of  this  dirty  and  ill-lit  little  station. 
I  gave  my  baggage  receipt  and  kilometric  book 
to  a  porter,  explaining  that  I  wished  to  go  on  to 
Madrid  by  the  express,  then  almost  due.  But 
his  bearing,  as  he  took  his  place  in  the  rapidly 
forming  queue,  did  not  inspire  confidence,  and 
I  surveyed  the  booking-office  with  a  feeling  of 
vague  uneasiness.  It  was  already  in  possession 
of  a  crowd  of  passengers,  and  booking  was  going 
forward  briskly — as  briskly,  that  is,  as  the  opera- 
tion is  ever  carried  out  in  Spain.  The  express 
might  come  in  at  any  moment  now,  and — a  dread- 
ful thought  seized  me — what  if  I  could  not  get  a 
ticket !  It  would  mean  spending  the  night,  and 
perhaps  even  the  next  day,  at  Baeza,  or  Baeza 
station,  for  the  town,  or  village,  or  whatever  it 
was,  was  leagues  away  among  the  mountains ! 

The  combined  buffet  and  general  waiting-room 
did  not  look  at  all  promising.  At  a  table,  covered 
with  a  dirty  cloth,  sat  a  number  of  would-be 
passengers,  drinking  coffee  in  the  sloppy  Spanish 
fashion;  a  crowd  of  snoring  peasants  were  in 
possession  of  the  hard  wooden  seats,  and  of  other 
accommodation  there  was  none — it  seemed,  in 
short,  to  be  a  most  undesirable  place  in  which  to 
pass  the  night.  I  was  not  left  long  in  suspense.  By 
some  mysterious  means  the  clerk  in  the  booking- 
office  was  made  aware  that  there  was  no  more 
room  in  the  train,  the  window  shut  with  a  most 
uncompromising  bang,  and  the  word  went  forth 
"  No  hay  asientos "  (There  are  no  seats).  So 
that  settled  the  matter — there  was  no  getting 
farther  that  night.  Almost  immediately  the 
express  glided  in,  the  fortunate  ones  who  had 
secured  places  scrambled  on  board,  and  the  train 
stole  off  again,  its  carefully  darkened  compart- 
ments suggesting  travellers  sleeping  happily 
among  the  cushions,  while  we  other  unfortunate 
ones  were  compelled  to  pass  an  indefinite  period 
at  Baeza ! 

There  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  take  the  situa- 
tion as  philosophically  as  possible;  regrets  were 
vain,  since  the  train  had  departed,  and  would 
relieve  the  situation  of  none  of  its  poignant 
features.  It  was  clearly  impossible  to  spend  the 
night  in  the  station,  so  I  addressed  the  waiter,  and 
asked  him  if  there  were  an  inn  anywhere  near 
where  the  night  could  be  passed.  He  replfed 
that  there  was,  and  rousing  a  porter,  sent  him 
off  for  the  key — for  all  the  world  as  though  the 
fonda  were  a  barn  or  a  stable,  to  be  kept  locked 
until  required  for  use. 

In  due  course  the  porter  returned,  bearing  in  his 
arms  one  of  those  gigantic  keys,  about  the  size  and 
shape  of  an  axe,  that  are  so  popular  in  Spain.  De- 
positing my  luggage  behind  the  refreshment  bar  (an 
unwise  proceeding,  but  the  waiter  declared  it  would 
be  all  right,  and  I  was  not  in  a  mood  to  worry 
over  trifles)  I  followed  the  porter  out  into  the 
night.  After  a  walk  of  some  twenty  minutes 
through  the  darkness,  we  reached  the  fonda,  a 
long,  low  building  (this  discovery  was  made 
next  morning,  for  nothing  could  be  seen  at  the 
time),  with  a  heavy  door,  which  yielded  to  the 
influence  of  the  mozo's  formidable  key.  Inside 
the  door  the  porter  left  me,  but  soon  reappeared 
in  the  company  of  an  elderly  and  very  dishevelled 
female.  A  candle  borne  by  the  lady  revealed 
a  dirty,  stone-paved  passage  and  a  narrow  stair- 
case, up  which  I  was  conducted  without  further 
ceremony.  Opening  the  door  of  a  small  room  con- 
taining two  beds  shrouded  in  bright  green  mosquito 
curtains,  the  pair  retired,  the  porter  agreeing  to 
call  me  in  plenty  of  time  to  catch  the  mixed  train, 
which  would  leave  for  Madrid  at  nine  o'clock  in 
the  morning.  Carefully  bolting  the  door,  for  the 
appearance  of  the  place  seemed  to  warrant  the 
precaution,  I  turned  my  attention  to  one  of  the 
couches  with  the  verdant  hangings. 

At  first  sight,  everything  appeared  to  be  in 
order :  the  linen,  if  coarse,  was  clean,  and  there 
were  no  obvious  signs  of  what  Baedeker  deli- 
cately calls  "  enemies  to  repose."  But  alas  for 
the  deceitfulness  of  appearances !  No  sooner 
was  the  candle  extinguished,  than  the  presence 
of  these  enemies  was  at  once  made  manifest. 
Hastily  rising,  I  proceeded  to  investigate  matters 
—there  is  no  need  to  describe  what  I  saw,  but 
the  case  was  a  bad  one,  and  the  rest  of  the  night 
was  passed,  to  the  delight  of  a  myriad  mosquitoes, 
on  an  improvised  couch  of  three  hard  wooden 
chairs,  placed  in  a  row,  and  moved  well  away  from 
the  wall.  And  what  a  night  it  was !  Dogs,  near 
and  far,  barked  ceaselessly,  crickets  chirped  out- 
side, somewhere  in  the  distance  a  sereno  called 
at  intervals,  while,  near  at  hand,  and  dominating 
all  other  sounds,  rose  the  attenuated  hum  of  the 
persistent  mosquito.  But  dawn  came  at  last,  and 
with  it  I  rose,  or  rather  descended,  from  the  chairs, 
sought  out  the  senora,  and,  paying  her  without 
a  word  the  two  pesetas  asked  for  this  accommo- 
dation, departed.  Thus  I  passed  the  night  at  a 
Spanish  village  inn,  such  an  inn  as  would  have 
seemed,  probably,  quite  familiar  to  Gil  Bias  or 
Don  Quixote,  and  agreed,  in  all  particulars, 
with  the  descriptions  of  village  inns  handed 
down  to  us  by  these  worthies.  And  this,  I  may 
say,  was  the  only  occasion  upon  which  I  had 
reason  to  be  dissatisfied  with  Spanish  hospitality. 
 

